Drug-resistant epilepsy remains a significant clinical and societal burden, with one third of people with epilepsy continuing to experience seizures despite the availability of around 30 anti-seizure drugs (ASDs). Further, ASDs often have substantial adverse effects, including impacts on learning and memory. Therefore, it is important to develop new ASDs, which may be more potent or better tolerated. Here, we report the preliminary preclinical evaluation of BICS01, a synthetic product based on a natural compound, as a potential ASD. To model seizure-like activity in vitro, we prepared hippocampal slices from adult male Sprague Dawley rats, and elicited epileptiform bursting using high extracellular potassium. BICS01 (200 µM) rapidly and reversibly reduced the frequency of epileptiform bursting but did not change broad measures of network excitability or affect short-term synaptic facilitation. BICS01 was well tolerated following systemic injection at up to 1,000 mg/kg. However, we did not observe any protective effect of systemic BICS01 injection against acute seizures evoked by pentylenetetrazol. These results indicate that BICS01 is able to acutely reduce epileptiform activity in hippocampal networks. Further preclinical development studies to enhance pharmacokinetics and accumulation in the brain, as well as studies to understand the mechanism of action, are now required.

Epilepsy comprises more than 40 clinical syndromes affecting millions of patients and families worldwide. To decode the molecular and pathological framework of epilepsy researchers, need reliable human epilepsy and control brain samples. Brain bank organizations collecting and supplying well-documented clinically and pathophysiologically tissue specimens are important for high-quality neurophysiology and neuropharmacology studies for epilepsy and other neurological diseases. New development in molecular mechanism and new treatment methods for neurological disorders have evoked increased demands for human brain tissue. An epilepsy brain bank is a storage source for both the frozen samples as well as the formaldehyde fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue from epilepsy surgery resections. In 2014, the University of Saskatchewan have started collecting human epilepsy brain tissues for the first time in Canada. This review highlights the necessity and importance of Epilepsy Brain bank that provides unique access for research to valuable source of brain tissue and blood samples from epilepsy patients. The pioneer of brain banking in Canada was Dr. Ali Rajput at the University of Saskatchewan. In 1968, Dr. Ali Rajput created the first brain bank in Canada dedicated only to patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and other movement disorders. Development of the Bank led to numerous international and local contributions and critical breakthroughs in the modern treatment of PD, only possible because every case has the full documentation of 1 (1) detailed longitudinal clinical history, frozen tissue, and complete neuropathologic examination (2–6). The bank has more than 400 brains from patients with PD and other movement disorders and it shares samples with national and international qualified scientists for free (1). In 1980, McGill University created the next brain bank in Canada. The bank is based at the Douglas Mental Health University Institute and has become one of the largest brain banks in the world. Currently, it houses more than 3,000 brains as well as a large relational database containing demographic, clinical and developmental histories from the donors2. The bank has brains from people who suffered from different neurodegenerative diseases such as PD and other dementias, schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder, substance use disorder and patients who committed suicide. The brain bank at the McGill University is internationally recognized and receives annual requests from many neuroscientists from Canada and abroad. In 1993, Dalhousie Medical School established the Maritime Brain Tissue Bank3. The bank houses more than 800 brains from donors in the Maritimes and the tissue is available for local, national and international researchers. The bank focuses on Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia and non-Alzheimer dementia, and is in the process of expanding its facilities to include cases of spinal cord disease, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), epilepsy, PD, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, stroke, and schizophrenia. In 2014, the University of Saskatchewan created the first epilepsy brain bank in Canada4. This article reviews the concept of an epilepsy brain bank and the potential research that can be done with these samples. An epilepsy brain bank with living donors, such as the one established at the University of Saskatchewan, enables correlation of clinical information and investigations with findings in tissues. This article is divided into sections, the first explaining the work done in patients before epilepsy surgery and the potential correlations with potential research in the samples. Other subsequent sections point out the initial lines of research questions and priorities with the brain-banked tissue samples. Epilepsy comprises more than 40 clinical syndromes affecting 50 million people worldwide. People with epilepsy experience unprovoked recurring seizures. This is a disease that poses significant challenges for modern medicine, as ~36% of patients receiving anti-convulsant medication have inadequate seizure control (7). In addition, up to 50% of patients with epilepsy suffer from behavioral co-morbidities such as impaired cognition, anxiety, and depression, which can often be more debilitating for the patients than the seizures themselves (8). The median incidence rate of epilepsy in developed countries ranges from 25 to 50 per 100,000 people per year, whereas in developing countries it ranges from ~30–115 per 100,000 people per year due to the addition of acquired infectious epilepsy, such as neurocysticercosis (9). In Canada, the prevalence of epilepsy is 50 cases per 100,000 people (10). Partial seizures account for up to 50–60% of epilepsy cases in adults (incidence and prevalence) and temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common type of partial epilepsy (10). Approximately 36% of patients with epilepsy do not respond to medication but this percentage is even higher for patients with TLE, where 70% of patients typically do not benefit from current drug treatments (11). Years of uncontrolled epilepsy can lead to cognitive decline and psychiatric complications and increase the burden of epilepsy on society by reducing the likelihood that TLE patients will lead a productive and independent life. In addition, patients with TLE have a much higher mortality rate compared with the other population (12). Current drug treatments have low efficacy rates in patients with TLE, but a surgical treatment option does exist. A well-conducted randomized controlled trial has demonstrated that surgical management of TLE is superior to pharmacological management in patients with drug resistant epilepsy (13). Evidence also suggests that the results of epilepsy surgery are sustained over time, and that the surgery can provide innumerable benefits in patients including enhanced quality of life, decreased mortality, and enriched social networks. An epilepsy brain bank is a storage source for pieces of tissues from epilepsy surgery resections. The tissues are donated by living patients undergoing brain resection for the treatment of their medically refractory epilepsy. Brains are properly extracted, dissected and orderly stored either in formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks or cryopreserved in −80°C freezers. Control tissues can be obtained from brain surgeries in the same center from patients with other neurological conditions such as brain tumors, vascular malformations and other focal lesions. These patients may have associated seizures but also, they could be seizure-free being an adequate control for some studies. In addition to accepting donated control brain tissues we will seek other brain banks to find and receive suitable control brain tissues as well, for example normal tissue. Alternatively, the aspirated tissue from resection margins, if available, could also serve as the healthy control tissue for each patient's seizure focus. The discovery of the molecular underpinnings and potential treatments of human epilepsy based on new molecular targets is demonstrably lagging behind progress made in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and PD (14), partly due to the lack of availability of properly stored human tissues for the research. In neurodegenerative diseases, post-mortem brains have helped advance research, however, as epilepsy patients are usually much younger, post-mortem brain donation will not represent this population at all. Tissue donation during active disease is a solution to this problem, so long as the excised and ethically approved stored brain tissue after epilepsy surgery does not compromise standard of care including classic pathology assessment of the tissue. Many fundamental questions in epilepsy remain unanswered: why do some epilepsy patients fail to respond to antiepileptic drugs(AEDs)? Why, despite newly developed epilepsy drugs, has their efficacy not improved? Why do 30 to 40% of epilepsy patients never respond to AEDs despite new drugs appearing in the market every year? Are there any better targets for developing new AEDs? Is it possible to develop antiepileptogenic drugs as opposed to antiepileptic drugs? What are the mechanisms of neurodegeneration in the epileptic brain? Are there targets for drug development with ability to prevent neurodegeneration and memory impairment in patients with epilepsy? As per current standard of care in most epilepsy centers, the brain tissue obtained from temporal lobectomies or other types of temporal resections is fixed in formaldehyde to undergo routine pathological analysis. No further research studies are usually performed on the specimen. In addition, formaldehyde-fixed tissue is not suitable for most advanced research methods such as molecular biology, proteomics, and genomics. It is extremely crucial to perform further studies on brain samples using advanced methods, such as bulk or single cell RNA sequencing (RNAseq), mass spectrometry and transcriptomic analysis, coupled with traditional techniques of molecular biology, biochemistry, and immunohistochemistry to answer important questions. For example, how does prolonged seizure damage hippocampal neurons, and what is the role of glutamate receptor expression, and specifically do anti-seizure medications that attenuate glutamate receptors overexcitation protect hippocampal neurons and preserve memory? The initial step is saving fresh brain specimens for molecular biology/ biochemical studies with storage at −80°C in a freezer. Concurrently obtained blood samples from patients will also be banked for future epilepsy-related genetic studies. Our center has started saving the brain from epilepsy surgeries and we encourage other Canadian epilepsy centers to begin this process, as expanding the tissue source will provide a richer resource for sharing epileptic and control tissue that could be used to address the following: (1) To detect the chronic differences in regions of the brain prone to seizures using proteomics, immunohistochemistry, and molecular biology; (2) To identify biomarkers of refractory epileptic activity, the common abnormal pathways shared by many patients with temporal epilepsy will be used as biomarkers of refractory epileptic activity; (3) These biomarkers will be translated into therapeutic targets, which will be tested in animal models to determine efficacy prior to clinical trials; (4) Target binding of these compounds in humans at therapeutic doses will be assessed using Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scanning with specific ligands (e.g., 19F-Flurodeoxyglucose). The Advantage of Epilepsy Brain Bank Over Brain Bank for Neurodegenerative Diseases There are several advantages: No large storage space is needed. In neurodegenerative diseases, brain donation is post mortem and therefore the whole brain tissue is stored (usually half frozen and half formalin fixed), however, in epilepsy brain bank a small piece of surgically dissected tissue is stored. In brain banks for neurodegenerative diseases, the tissue is harvested post-mortem and therefore, hypoxic-ischemic changes in the brain are unavoidable. However, in an epilepsy brain bank, the tissue can be processed and stored quite quickly after surgical excision with minimal chance of hypoxic-ischemic changes. In addition, in samples from an epilepsy brain bank the entire tissue is preserved evenly since the small pieces of tissue are rapidly frozen, resulting in the inner depth of the tissue being frozen almost instantaneously as the tissue surface, whereas the freezing procedure required for a brain hemisphere with degenerative conditions could take longer thereby adding increased risk of hypoxic/ischemic brain damage. The samples are a better representation of the population as they are usually harvested during ongoing, active disease in living patients as opposed to neurodegenerative samples that are usually harvested post mortem and much later in the course of the disease. Methodology of Developing an Epilepsy Brain Bank at the University of Saskatchewan After applying for and obtaining human biomedical ethics approval (often the most time-consuming step), a reliable storage location for both the frozen samples as well as the formaldehyde fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens has been established with funding support from institutional and provincial funding agencies (e.g., College of Medicine at University of Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation). All samples were coded and kept in locked locations, with the decoding data and patient's clinical information stored on a password protected computer using reliable software. The freezer must be equipped with emergency power as well as an alarm system to indicate any temperature change. Tissue collection, processing and storage was a collaborative process involving an epilepsy surgeon, two epileptologists, research coordinator, and two neuropathologists. After specimen excision, the tissues are placed in saline solution in sterile plastic containers, labeled based on anatomical location, for transport to the neuropathology lab. Neuropathologists then confirm the anatomical locations and cut the samples into smaller pieces, selecting the required amount of tissue for clinical pathological staining and diagnosis, with the rest left for banking. Any portion of formalin fixed samples saved for clinical pathology but not ultimately used will also be later transferred to the brain bank for storage. Fresh pieces of tissue are slow frozen with isopropyl alcohol in cryostat Eppendorf tubes and then stored in the locked −80°C freezer. The location of tissue in the freezer (shelf #, location on the shelf), patient coding information and clinical data are then entered into secure software developed by the University of Saskatchewan information technology department, on a password protected computer located in the same locked room where the freezer is located. Only the two epileptologists who are the biomedical ethics applicants have the access keys to the tissue storage room. A sample of patient's blood is also stored in the same freezer for possible future analysis. The neurosurgical suctioning and/or ultrasonic aspiration supernatant if available can also be centrifuged and saved for use in proteomics experiments. Potential Correlation of fMRI Studies With Tissue Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a non-invasive tool increasingly used for mapping eloquent cortex in patients prior to brain surgery. The most common clinical application of fMRI is for functional mapping of basic language (15, 16) and simple motor tasks (16). While many labs rely on silent reading, it has been shown that reading aloud serves to better activate regions of the language network in the temporal lobe (15), in particular using exception words that cannot be read phonetically (17, 18). In addition to the more common language and motor tasks, recent evidence has emphasized the value of mapping visual attention-shift networks which are important for reading (19). Furthermore, given the location of the temporal resection, memory and emotional processing are also of principal concern in TLE patients (16), including regions near the fusiform gyrus for emotional face processing and parahippocampal gyrus for memory and emotional place processing. Finally, people with epilepsy have heightened visual perceptual sensitivity, which has been associated with cortical hyperexcitability (20). Such hyperexcitability of visual cortex has been demonstrated via repetitive visual stimuli (21). Patient's scans are taken during interictal periods allowing for a neurocognitive assessment of the state prior to surgery. Our pre-surgical planning includes fMRI localization of eloquent cortex comprising spoken language, motor, attention, memory, emotional face and place processing and visual cortical excitability. Our fMRI battery not only provides a neurocognitive assessment useful for pre-surgical planning but also for basic research. Images are collected using a 3 Tesla Siemens Skyra MRI and have been summarized elsewhere (15). During the scan, we will also be running diffusion-weighted tensor imaging (DTI) to noninvasively trace neuronal white matter tracts in the patients. The fMRI images are considered prior to and during the patient's surgery to assist in localization of function proximal to the resection line, particularly with respect to language. Pediatric Specimens Epilepsy surgery has become an accepted treatment option for children with medically refractory or treatment-resistant epilepsy (10). Pediatric patients requiring epilepsy surgery have seizures caused by a wide range of pathologies particularly within the extra-temporal regions. The clinical outcome of epilepsy surgery in these patients is variable depending on many factors including the type and location of lesion resected (22). The development of an epilepsy brain bank that includes specimens procured from pediatric epilepsy surgery patients presents an exciting and unique opportunity to study the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying pediatric medically refractory epilepsy. The characteristic features exhibited by the pediatric epilepsy population can be correlated and further explored with the brain tissue bank, as follows: (A) Developmental brain lesions such as cortical dysplasia and developmental brain tumors including gangliogloma (GG) and dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNT) are common causes of medically refractory epilepsy in children. Recent advances in the field of neuropathology have allowed, by examination of surgically resected tissue, a greater understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the epileptogenesis of these lesions (23). (B) Although many different pathophysiological mechanisms have been proposed, much remains to be learned about the epileptogenesis of these lesions. (C) Enhancing our knowledge in this field has the potential to allow for the development of targeted anti-epileptic medical therapies in children and adults with developmental brain lesions. (D) Children can present with other causes of medically refractory epilepsy that is amenable to surgical treatment. This includes Rasmussen's Encephalitis, which is an inflammatory disorder that has a predilection in childhood (24). While much has been learned about the pathophysiology of Rasmussen's Encephalitis, little is known regarding the underlying cause of the inflammatory processes and the susceptibility to this disease in patients. Therefore, the epilepsy brain bank could provide a valuable tool to probe deeper into the mechanisms of medically refractory epilepsy in these pediatric patients. Surgical Techniques for Preservation of Brain En bloc resection techniques are used whenever possible to maximize preservation of brain tissue. Once the epileptic focus is identified as a target for resection, the margins of resection are planned along anatomic borders. If the target gyrus is surrounded by non-eloquent brain, trans gyral resection through neighboring gyri allows for en bloc removal of the seizure focus along with a margin of normal brain. The trans gyral approach has the additional advantage of tending to result in less bleeding compared to trans sulcal and intralesional approaches. If neighboring gyri are eloquent and need to be preserved, the target gyrus can be isolated and removed trans sulcally. Sub-pial dissection along gyral borders helps preserve the integrity of neighboring gyral cortex, as well as the any vasculature within the sulci (25, 26). More complex resections may be planned as step-wise piecemeal removals of defined anatomic sections. For example, when performing a temporal lobectomy, if the patient's anatomy suggests that resection in a single bloc becomes problematic, the resection can be accomplished stepwise, first by removing the cortical plug in one block, exposing the temporal horn of the ventricle and the hippocampal head and body, followed by removal of the mesial structures including the hippocampal head as a second block, using subpial dissection to separate the hippocampus and uncus from the arachnoid of the underlying cistern below. This is then followed by removal of any remaining temporal tip tissue as a third bloc, and each of these blocks can be sent as separate specimens with their cytoarchitecture preserved. Intralesional aspiration is avoided whenever possible, and the use of ultrasonic aspirators is limited to dissection at the resection margins, if needed (25, 26). In addition to maximally preserving brain specimens for research purposes, en bloc resection can provide clinical benefits including more specimens for pathological diagnoses, reduction of surgical blood loss, and, in the case of lesional resections suspected to be neoplastic, minimization of spillage of potentially neoplastic cells into the resection cavity as well as along margins of normal tissue around the resected suspected neoplasm where possible. Figure 1 shows a bloc resection of the temporal region (25, 26). Neuropsychology and Epilepsy Brain Bank In individuals with epilepsy, disturbances in cognitive functioning, memory and language in particular, are frequent complaints and clinical findings, which can be very distressing or disabling. There are a number of common causes of epilepsy that have identifiable structural change in the affected brain region, but in the majority of epilepsy cases the cause is not known. A further complication is that some patients do not respond to antiepileptic drugs and their seizures remain intractable. Ongoing seizure activity in addition to antiepileptic load also has a negative impact on cognitive functioning. Slightly over half of seizures in adults are complex partial type and about 80% of these seizures originate in the temporal lobe. Resection of the temporal lobe is sometimes the best course of the treatment and allows for a closer examination of the affected tissue. This resected tissue has the potential to be very informative in a number of domains of investigation. Accordingly, all potential brain bank participants will be administered a comprehensive neuropsychological test battery that will include clinical measures of intelligence, language, visuoperceptual ability, immediate and delayed verbal and visual memory, executive functioning, fine motor speed and dexterity, psychomotor speed and cognitive flexibility as well as psychological well-being. These cognitive domains were selected in order to provide representative coverage of the major domains of higher cognitive functioning focusing on measures that are commonly used in clinical practice as well as providing an assessment of psychosocial adjustment. These same measures will be re-administered to brain bank participants post resection and will allow for examination and correlation of participant demographic factors, clinical characteristics, cognitive functioning and neuropathology to assist in better understanding the mechanisms underlying intractable temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain Bank and Neurophysiology The epilepsy brain bank has been essential to supply the well-documented tissues to study the functional alteration and mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of epilepsy. Recent findings in neurophysiology have led to increased demands for postmortem human brain tissue. Advances in the fields of genomics and proteomics offer new ways to study the pathophysiology of neurological diseases. Immunohistochemical and electron microscopic analyses show that cortical slices originating from temporal lobectomy in temporal lobe epilepsy persist well in culture for about 11 days without any substantial changes. These collected tissues have intact neuropil, endothelial cells, basal lamina, and myelinating and non-myelinating axons. Moreover, mitotic bodies in tumor slices verify cell proliferation occurring in these cells that pave the way for studying cell composition, migration, progression and efficient pharmacological therapies for brain tumor. Studies involving post mortem brain tissue may lead to improved understanding of the structural and molecular neuropathology (27) and further elucidation of molecular mechanisms of epilepsy (28). However, recent studies using antemortem tissue verify that epileptiform activity in temporal lobe and hippocampal slices can indeed be preserved and recorded in vitro (29, 30). The normal electrophysiological activity recorded from epileptic slice culture appears to be preserved for several weeks (31). Furthermore, the result of interictal-like activity from subiculum of human acute temporal lobe slice cultures shows the same pattern as intracranial electroencephalography (EEG) recording from the same patient with temporal lobe epilepsy (32). Also optogenetic stimulation has been employed to probe network mechanisms in human cortical and hippocampal circuits, suggesting proof-of-concept application of this technique on human brain tissue which could accelerate the future development of anti-epileptic drugs using this technique (33). Brain Bank and Neuropharmacology In order to prevent, treat and cure the epilepsies, researchers need to determine what causes altered neuronal excitability that triggers the abnormal firing patterns during epileptic seizures. Epileptogenesis is a process of initial brain-damaging insult that leads to a cascade of molecular and cellular alterations. Cellular changes include neurogenesis, neurodegeneration, axonal and myelin injury, dendritic remodeling, blood brain barrier damage, alterations in extracellular matrix composition and possible aggregation of intracellular or secreted materials. Discovery of these mechanisms has the potential to yield new anti-seizure therapeutic targets. Of all candidate mechanisms, one is currently in clinical trials, namely the inhibitor of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling Everolimus (in progress phase 2 trial for cortical hyperexcitability in tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02451696); a completed phase 3 trial with patients with TSC who have refractory partial-onset seizures (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01713946). mTOR hyperactivation signaling in epilepsy makes it an efficient target for therapeutic intervention and have driven the significant effort to pharmacologically target this pathway (34). Other potential targets include inhibition of cytokines interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, and interleukin-10 (35, 36). Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), a classically proinflammatory mediator of acute pathogenesis after injury, has been identified to initiate and aggravate seizure activity in epilepsy (37, 38). Blocking IL-1β synthesis or inhibiting signaling through IL-1 receptor can improve seizure severity and incidence (37). An inhibitor of IL-1β synthesis is being studied in patient with treatment-resistant epilepsy. Other areas of study in epileptogenesis include plasma membrane proteins that are involved in neuronal communication by the passage of ions, such as sodium, calcium, chloride and potassium through these protein channels. A disruption in any of these processes could be involved in epilepsy. The prominent role of voltage-gated ion channels, glutamatergic receptors, and GABA receptors in epileptogenesis as a molecular target in the development of novel anti-epileptic drug has been reviewed elsewhere (39). Voltage-gated Na+ channel inhibition is the mechanism of action of phenytoin, carbamazepine and lamotrigine, and many other classic and novel anti-epileptic drugs. Retigabine (a neuronal KCNQ/Kv7 K+ channel opener), ethosuximide (a T-type Ca+ channel blocker), benzodiazepines [a positive allosteric modulator of GABA (A) receptor, promoting increased inhibitory neurotransmission], and felbamate/topiramate [having mixed actions: GABA (A) receptor agonist, sodium channel blocker, and NMDA receptor antagonist] are current therapeutic approaches for epilepsy (39). The knowledge of the role of ion channels from human brain samples is allowing the design of new and more exclusive therapeutic strategies (40). Moreover, disruption of the blood-brain barrier could be one of the major causes in seizure pathogenesis. Leakage of blood derived proteins into fluid surrounding the brain, leads to hyperactivity of neurons in the area of the brain surrounding the leakage. During epileptogenesis, an increase in IL-1β and IL-1 receptor was found at the time of blood brain barrier damage (41). Glial cells are non-neuronal cells with important supportive role in the brain. Astrocytes are a type of glial cell that are involved in the redistribution of elevated K+ and transmitter concentration during neuronal activity. Investigation of specimens from patients with pharmaco-resistant temporal lobe epilepsy and epilepsy models revealed changes in expression, localization, and function of astroglial K+ (42). Recent findings reveal that ceftriaxone, an antibiotic that improves the housekeeping role of astrocytes, has been shown to decrease seizure frequency (43). The relationship of immune system to the development of certain forms of epilepsy has been studied (44). In aggressive forms of epilepsy, antibodies may decrease the function of brain receptors, disrupting the neuronal function. Findings from early-stage clinical trials suggest that strategies aimed at adjusting the body's immune system may provide a means of treating these otherwise untreatable forms of epilepsy. Brain bank collections that gather and provide standard samples clinically and pathologically are beneficial in the progress of advanced neurological research. Without brain banks facilitating the process of getting human brain tissues, it is more difficult for many neuroscientists to do research. In previous studies, animal models were the most important source of sample to replicate human neurological diseases, although these models in some cases could not replicate completely the biochemical and cellular mechanisms involved in human neurological disorders because of the complexity of human diseases. Thirty-three percentages of patients with Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE), the most common form of epilepsy, do not response to current antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). The AEDs used for non-epileptic disorders, such as rapamycin, everolimus, celecoxib, bumetanide, amiloride, resveratrol, and losartan have been studied in animal models of epilepsy with good outcomes (45). Losartan that is an angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1) antagonist has appeared as an anticonvulsant and anti-epileptogenic agent in animal models. Furthermore, the neuroprotective effects of this drug have been studied in animal models with Post-Traumatic Epilepsy (PTE) (46), kainic acid-induced status epilepticus (47), seizure in animal model with co-morbid hypertension and epilepsy (48), pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-kindled seizures (49). In spite of the suppressive role of losartan in different kinds of animal seizure model, it failed to exert effect on epileptiform activity in human brain slices from patients with pharmaco-resistant TLE (50). Brain banks combined with advanced modern neurobiological, proteomics and transcriptomic analyses can contribute to finding novel therapeutic anti-epileptic key targets directed by neuroscientists and pharmaceutical companies. The number of brain banks established worldwide has increased dramatically within the last decade, and this reflects an increased collaboration and engaging relationship between tissue donors, clinicians, neuropathologists, and neuroscientists. Epilepsy brain banks are confronting a crucial need for a consensus on the clinical and neuropathological diagnostic criteria for epilepsy that will make their samples appropriate for high-quality research. The identification and validation of biomarkers in both in vivo samples and autopsy cases have produced new attitudes toward neurological disorders. Well-documented autopsy material has been applied to study the human brain proteome in neurological diseases and in normal aging (51–54). The identification of altered genes in the human brain proteome in the early stages of the progress of epileptic brain diseases can provide valuable insight into potential biomarkers or novel targets for epilepsy that can be further developed that ultimately helps improve patient diagnosis and treatment. Brain banks have used analysis of the membrane and soluble-fractions to identify perturbed genes in brain proteomes in neurological disorders. The manipulation of island-clustering analysis (55) following gel electrophoresis facilitates these comparisons between membrane and soluble protein fractions; this method is also capable of identifying and recognizing the biomarker proteins in neurological disorders and aging. Moreover, brain banked tissue samples can also be a valuable tool in identifying and confirming the global changes in gene expression and proteome dynamics in epileptic brains. Large-scale protein-protein interaction maps and hub genes generated from proteomics methods have recently been demonstrated to provide insight into the possible perturbed multi-protein complexes and genetic interactions in neuronal cells before and after differentiation (6). Whole cell, nuclear, cytosolic or extensive biochemical fractionation with in-depth mass spectrometry profiling could reveal widespread changes in the protein-protein interaction networks and hub genes that may facilitate our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying different forms of epilepsy, which has the potential to improve the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy. Longitudinal clinical data can also be correlated with the proteomic findings and neuropathological correlates. During the 2011 Human Proteome Organization meeting, a decision was taken to launch the international, multidisciplinary Human Brain Proteome Atlas Project. The main goal of the plan was to analyze the proteomes of typical areas within the healthy human brain during normal aging, and to compare these with the proteomes of similar zones in subjects with specific diseases, such as epilepsy. This human proteome project and the proliferation of brain tissue banks worldwide will accelerate the identification of key molecules and pathways involved in epilepsy, and will also facilitate the knowledge and clinical translation of the proteomics findings generated by robust, advanced methods of high-throughput mass spectrometry and integrated bioinformatics computational analysis. Studies of the molecular and biochemical underpinnings of brain diseases using post-mortem brain tissue have inherent limitations (e.g., hypoxic brain tissue damage, possible degradation of native protein-protein interactions and RNA degradation), therefore, it is crucial to have a readily available ante-mortem brain tissue bank to generate protein-protein interaction network map that most resembles the native interactions occurring in the healthy or diseased brains (55–61). In the brains of affected individuals, peptide and protein patterns are complex, and new molecular tools, such as MALDI-M, are needed to characterize these patterns and to identify specific proteins involved in neurological diseases such as epilepsy. MALDI-MS can be used to generate peptide and protein profiles of brain-tissue sections, and also enables the localization of neuropeptides and proteins in much smaller areas. These proteins at a high spatial resolution with markers of cellular components can document the localization patterns of molecular entities implicated in epileptic brain at the subcellular level (51–54). The advantages of having a readily available brain bank for studying these molecular markers for epilepsy can be significant in providing new information about the molecular nature of the patient's epilepsy, and with informed new knowledge and the recognition of a rational therapeutic goal, the patient can feel empowered and engaged in directing the type of research that can be pursued with the patient's own epilepsy surgery brain-banked tissue sample. In recent years, some studies have yielded substantial progress in the classification of genetic mutations involved in different forms of epilepsies (62–64). Some types of epilepsy are associated with mutations in ion channels and ligand-gated ionotropic receptors (65, 66) Family members affected by certain epilepsy syndromes can undergo genetic testing to find possible underlying genetic mutations. The functional consequences of these mutations can be studied in transgenic animal models bearing the gene mutation, and this would then allow potential therapies to be introduced to treat the epilepsy phenotype. Ultimately the identification of a genetic basis for a type of epilepsy could improve the care and medical management of patients with epilepsy. Also armed with the knowledge of an existing family history of a heritable epilepsy-related gene mutation, the affected family members are informed of any precipitating factors that can increase their risk of having epilepsy. Therefore, close collaboration among the basic scientists and clinicians, and the generosity of patients in donating their brain tissue for brain banking will lead to investigations that will minimize the effects of many risk factors, including genetic basis, among large populations of people affected by the epilepsies. There is consensus that current brain-banked tissue samples should be accompanied by clinical and neuropathological diagnostic criteria to facilitate the clinical translation of high-quality research. Adenosine-Based Therapeutic Targets and Epilepsy Brain Bank The development of novel neuroprotective therapies for patients suffering from pharmaco-resistant Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE) is urgently needed; therefore, the human epilepsy brain bank will be utilized to confirm pre-clinical data gathered using animal models for TLE. Adenosine, an endogenous nucleoside that acts as a neuromodulator in the brain, plays an integral role in the pathophysiological etiology of TLE, where adenosine-based treatment strategies have proven to be efficacious. Increasing hippocampal adenosine signaling has been found to have anti-epileptiform actions through adenosine A1 receptors (A1Rs), inhibitory G protein coupled receptors that can induce profound synaptic depression (67). A1R activation has also been shown to be neuroprotective against excitotoxic neurodegeneration in the hippocampus of TLE animal models (68). There is continued interest in the cellular mechanisms by which adenosine A1R activation reduces epileptiform activity, as well as in identifying pharmacological targets involved in the actions of adenosine for neuroprotection. Previous and ongoing investigations have demonstrated the involvement of adenosine A1 and A2A (A2AR) receptors in the pathophysiology of neurodegeneration in animal stroke models, which display post-stroke depression, cognitive dysfunction and increased post-stroke seizures (2, 69). An important physical and functional interaction between A1Rs and glutamate AMPA receptors (AMPARs) in rat hippocampus contributes to the robust AMPAR endocytosis and persistent synaptic depression observed after prolonged A1R activation or during hypoxic insult (69, 70). This functional and physical interaction between A1R and AMPAR in hippocampus underlies hippocampal neurodegeneration (70). Current investigations are aimed at further characterizing how prolonged A1R stimulation leads to altered compositions of AMPA receptor subunits (i.e., resulting in the over-expression of the calcium-permeable GluA1 AMPA receptor subunits) and altered surface expression of adenosine A2A receptors that could both promote increased hippocampal neuronal excitability and consequently generate seizures in our animal stroke models. Additionally, the equilibrative nucleoside transporters (ENTs) are passive nucleoside transporters that allow adenosine transport across cell membranes, and treatment with selective ENT antagonists has been shown to reduce neuronal excitability in animal models of TLE, similarly to A1R agonist treatment (71). Cannabidiol, a recently identified neuroprotective agent, has also been shown to inhibit ENTs (72), and we are currently investigating its potential as a neuroprotectant in the hippocampus by modulating extracellular adenosine levels. In preliminary studies, elucidation of the signal transduction pathways activated by A1R stimulation in the hippocampus showed evidence of modulation of the expression, localization, and function of ionic channels, including the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels (HCN1, HCN2, and HCN4) and the HERG potassium channels (Kv11.1). Importantly, key alterations in these channels have been shown to underlie some forms of epilepsy (73). These modifications in both HCN and HERG channels are suggested to contribute to the acquisition of recurrent spontaneous seizures and initiation of epileptiform activity, to promote the subsequent propagation of seizure activity, and to increase and induce the state of dendritic hyper-excitability in dentate gyrus granule and/or CA1 pyramidal hippocampal neurons to generate the characteristic hyper-excitability within hippocampal circuits in TLE. With the use of the human epilepsy brain bank to discover new genetic mutations, it is plausible to suggest in future studies whether genetic loss-of-function mutations in the voltage-gated HERG and HCN channels, ENTs and A1Rs exist to modulate neuronal excitability and induce seizures in patients. Importance of Epilepsy Brain Bank in the Development of Treatment Strategies More than 50 million people worldwide suffer from epilepsy and about one third of these patients are considered resistant to pharmacotherapy, despite the availability of more than 20 anti-epileptic drug choices. In addition to incurring a higher drug cost to treat epilepsy, the consequence of drug resistant epilepsy in these patients is much more severe as judged by a four to seven-fold increase in mortality rates in this group compared to drug-responsive epileptic patients (7, 74, 75). Therefore, new classes of anti-epileptic medications are urgently needed to alleviate suffering of those individuals not responding to the currently available therapeutic agents. One of the major resources in the discovery of new therapeutic agents is repurposing or repositioning drugs from other therapeutic fields with potential beneficial effects in epilepsy. Repurposing of existing drugs is an attractive, cost effective, and timely drug development strategy considering the fact that drug candidates have been already tested and evaluated in terms of safety, toxicity and side effects in patients with different diseases (76). In fact, it usually takes more than 10 years and a heavy, as well as risky, investment to bring an entirely novel chemical or biological therapeutic agent from bench to clinic. In addition to utilizing a high-throughput methodology, having clear research objectives and a thorough understanding of pharmacological mechanisms of action and signaling pathways contributing to epileptogenesis is an important necessity. Although drug repositioning in CNS disorders is an active area of research and discovery for neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and PD, repurposing a wide variety of drugs, ranging from anti-inflammatory agents to neurotrophic factors, in treatment of epilepsy has recently gained considerable momentum and attention (77, 78). Tissues collected and preserved by epilepsy brain banks will serve well for the drug repositioning research. Analyzing signaling molecules affected in resected specimens will provide a better understanding of pathways pathologically impacted, which in turn will assist selecting appropriate drug candidates for the epilepsy drug repurposing study. Moreover, information collected from TLE post-operation samples will enable us to screen the novel target molecules and signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of epilepsy. In recent years, studies on epilepsy animal models and post-surgical TLE specimens resulted in the discovery of several novel therapeutic targets (e.g., resveratrol, cyclooxygenase-2inhibitors, erythropoietin, and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) and signaling pathways including the potential involvement of interleukin 1β, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), nuclear erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs). Although these discoveries are promising and considered a great step forward in combating epilepsy, they are still far away from patients' medicine cabinets. More research and studies are needed to further confirm and validate previous observations as well as revealing as yet unidentified epilepsy-related signaling pathways and entities. Indeed, the epilepsy brain bank will be a pivotal establishment for this purpose. The main aim of this article is to help to stablish and spread the concept of an epilepsy brain bank. We believe that more institutions around the world should be interested in having epilepsy brain banks, especially in centers with active neurosurgical and epilepsy surgery programs. The epilepsy brain bank is also an opportunity for national and international collaborations in order to share tissue but also to share research ideas and technology to analyze the samples. Our article also explores the benefits of correlating clinical information of patients with the observations obtained from the human tissue. Once we have reached a large number of samples in our bank, we will work in the internationalization of our bank to collaborate with other centers. Author Contributions LH-R, JT-Z, and FM-A develop the idea of the epilepsy brain bank. JT-Z and LH-R are the holders of the bank in the University of Saskatchewan. HM collaborated to write the whole document. AW wrote the section related with surgical techniques. RA and VZ wrote the section on neuropathology. RB and MM wrote the section of imaging. RH wrote the section on pediatric neurology. MV wrote the section neuropsychology. FC and CT wrote the sections on physiology and pharmachology. AC reviews the whole document. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding This work was supported by the University of Saskatchewan fund, Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation (SHRF) Phase I Group Grant. FC received funding support from SHRF, University of Saskatchewan CoMRAD Award, Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada Grant-in-Aid. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

The purpose of this pilot study was to analyze treatment pathways of pediatric epilepsy using the common data model (CDM) based on electronic health record (EHR) data. We also aimed to reveal whether CDM analysis was feasible and applicable to epilepsy research. We analyzed the treatment pathways of pediatric epilepsy patients from our institute who underwent antiseizure medication (ASM) treatment for at least 2 years, using the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP)-CDM. Subgroup analysis was performed for generalized or focal epilepsy, varying age of epilepsy onset, and specific epilepsy syndromes. Changes in annual prescription patterns were also analyzed to reveal the different trends. We also calculated the proportion of drug-resistant epilepsy by applying the definition of seizure persistence after application of two ASMs for a sufficient period of time (more than 6 months). We identified 1,192 patients who underwent treatment for more than 2 years (mean ± standard deviation: 6.5 ± 3.2 years. In our pediatric epilepsy cohort, we identified 313 different treatment pathways. Drug resistance, calculated as the application of more than three ASMs during the first 2 years of treatment, was 23.8%. Treatment pathways and ASM resistance differed between subgroups of generalized vs. focal epilepsy, different onset age of epilepsy, and specific epilepsy syndromes. The frequency of ASM prescription was similar between onset groups of different ages; however, phenobarbital was frequently used in children with epilepsy onset < 4 years. Ninety-one of 344 cases of generalized epilepsy and 187 of 835 cases of focal epilepsy were classified as medically intractable epilepsy. The percentage of drug resistance was markedly different depending on the specific electro-clinical epilepsy syndrome [79.0% for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), 7.1% for childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), and 9.0% for benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS)]. We could visualize the annual trend and changes of ASM prescription for pediatric epilepsy in our institute from 2004 to 2017. We revealed that CDM analysis was feasible and applicable for epilepsy research. The strengths and limitations of CDM analysis should be carefully considered when planning the analysis, result extraction, and interpretation of results. Introduction Epilepsy is a heterogeneous and complex brain disorder comprising of many seizure types and epilepsy syndromes (1, 2). It is common practice for physicians to begin long-term, daily anti-seizure medication (ASM) treatment after a patient has experienced unprovoked seizures (3). The ASMs lead to satisfactory control of seizures for as many as 60–70% of newly treated patients (4). Unfortunately, 20–30% of patients have uncontrolled epilepsy (drug-resistant epilepsy) with seizures, adverse effects, and significantly increased risk of mortality and morbidity (1, 4). An analysis of ASM treatment patterns in a real clinical practice will help identify various types of patients with epilepsy. The treatment choice for epilepsy is empirical and often based on trial and error (1). Since the 1980s more than (>) 15 ASMs have been introduced, giving rise to more choices in selecting the first drug for epilepsy treatment but making it more difficult to make optimal treatment decisions (1). Patients who fail to improve with the first drug continue treatment with an alternative monotherapy (substitution) or a combination therapy (add-on), where a second drug is added to the current monotherapy (1, 4, 5). Regarding treatment choices for pediatric epilepsy, research findings are limited, and many clinical questions remain unresolved; thus, physicians must often rely on clinical judgement (6). The available information about the treatment sequence for pediatric syndromes and the use of therapy in actual medical practice is also limited (6). In an effort to achieve consensus on a number of treatment options, 41 U.S. experts were surveyed on pediatric epilepsy and seizures, including opinions regarding 645 treatment options, and the overall recommendations were reported in 2015 (6). Although the experts reached consensus on many treatment options, it remains to be evaluated whether treatment recommendations reflect actual practice and whether there is any difference between actual practice and recommendations. A study calculating ASM utilization patterns for patients with epilepsy has been conducted using the Swedish total-population register data (7). The study reported a limited number of drug choices for the treatment of the majority of new patients (7). Studies on patterns of drug utilization using electronic health record (EHR) and claims data from various countries can be found in the Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) community (8, 9). OHDSI is an international collaborative aiming at creating open-source solutions that emphasize the value of observational health data through large-scale analytics1. OHDSI adopts a distributed research network with federated data harmonized to the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership Common Data Model (OMOP-CDM), which represents healthcare data from diverse sources in a consistent and standardized way (10). In the CDM, domains such as patient demographics, conditions, drug exposures, measurements, observations, and procedures are modeled in a patient-centric relational data model with standard vocabularies. The common data structure (format) and the common representation of the content of data record enable the development of standard analysis tools. The CDM has been introduced to generate scientific evidence from a variety of data sources and conduct large-scale collaborative researches across different data sources. Patient privacy is maintained with de-identification of data sources and a distributed data model. An earlier research of the OHDSI network on characterizing treatment pathways for type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and depression revealed heterogeneity of the pathways among different data sources (8). An assessment of the current treatment choices for pediatric epilepsy using CDM data will provide real-word evidence of common practice and treatment patterns as well as current unmet needs for the development of more effective ASMs. Here, we aimed at conducting population-level analysis to characterize real-world pathways for the treatment of pediatric patients with epilepsy during the first 2 years of therapy using the CDM. The main purpose of this pilot study was to show the applicability of the CDM in big data analysis for epilepsy. The primary goal underlying the feasibility of our approach was to understand whether CDM analysis in epilepsy can provide the percentage of drug-resistant epilepsy in our pediatric cohort. We also aimed to provide detailed information regarding ASM prescription data in different types of epilepsy, age groups, and trends for each year between 2004 and 2017. Materials and Methods Study Design This is a retrospective, observational study. We analyzed ASM prescription patterns of all pediatric epilepsy patients in our hospital, whose treatment lasted longer than 2 years, from initial diagnosis to end of treatment. The main question in this study was whether we can produce the exact number of patients with drug-resistant epilepsy by applying the recent International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) definition (11) using the CDM. To calculate this number, we analyzed the total number of ASMs used during the treatment period. Since ASM withdrawal is considered after at least 2 years of seizure freedom (12, 13), we selected patients whose follow-up period was longer than 2 years. In our analysis, we defined drug resistance as an add-on of a third medication of the course of treatment. Further analysis of the treatment pathway and the number of ASMs used was performed by epilepsy category (focal epilepsy vs. generalized epilepsy) and onset age (under 4 years; between 4 and 13 years; over 13 years). We also performed analysis of distinct epilepsy syndromes [benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS), childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS)] that show typical drug resistance profiles. We analyzed the pattern of annual ASM prescription for monotherapy to find whether CDM analysis can provide information regarding varying tendency of ASM prescription for each year of treatment. Finally, we examined the serial changes in the number of people treated with certain ASMs in a specific year and the proportion of specific ASMs for each year of treatment. Population The population of interest was defined as pediatric patients with epilepsy who had at least 2 years of continuous observation and persistent treatment following initiation. The initial event cohort included patients who had had exposure to ASMs for the first time in the person's history at age ≤ 18, observation of at least 0 days prior and 730 days after the event index date to include at least 2 years prescription data, and limited initial events to the earliest event per person. The index date was the time of first exposure to the ASM class of N03A code defined in the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification System. Specifically, patients had to fulfill the following criteria: at least one prescription of an ASM exposure between 121 and 240 days, 241 and 360 days, 361 and 480 days, 481 and 600 days, and 601 and 730 days after the event index date (first prescription of ASM) (see Table S1 for epilepsy diagnosis codes). Additional qualifying inclusion criteria were that the patient had been diagnosed with epilepsy at least once, had at least one epilepsy diagnosis before inclusion in the study, the epilepsy diagnosis had started between all days before and all days after the event index date, and the patient had had regular follow-ups (see Table S2 for epilepsy drugs codes). The purpose of this inclusion was to prevent missing the patients whose epilepsy diagnosis was missed in any visit. The end date strategy was not selected. By default, the cohort end date was the end of the observation period that contained the index event. Without a limitation in the observation period before the index date, the patient had to have been observed for at least 730 days after the index date. The patient had to have at least one condition occurrence of epilepsy listed in the diagnosis code between all days before the index date and all days after the index date. Regarding the definition of persistent treatment, the patient had to have at least one occurrence of exposure to ASMs in each 120 day period during 2 years after the index date. The cohort meeting the population inclusion and exclusion criteria is depicted in Figure 1. Figure 1. Treatment pathway population criteria. The index date for our study population was the time of first exposure to ASMs for the first time in a patient's history with age ≤ 18 years. The patient had to have continuous observation for at least 730 days after the event index date and limited initial events to the earliest event per person. The patients had to have at least one epilepsy diagnosis code between all days before and after the event index date. The patients had to have a regular follow-up for at least 2 years after the index date. Specifically, patients had to have a drug exposure to epilepsy drugs in each 120 day period after the index date. Data Sources The over 14 year-old EHR data of Seoul National University Bundang Hospital (SNUBH), a tertiary university hospital in the metropolitan area, contain > 1.8 million patients. Data from May 2003 through October 2017 were transformed into an OMOP CDM, version 5.2. Since the data sources were de-identified, this study was approved with waiver of informed consents or exemption by the institutional review boards at our institution (IRB No: X-1810/497-902). Open Source Treatment Pathway In this study, the OHDSI's open-source software treatment pathway was used2. For each patient in the cohort, this software identifies the sequence of treatments in the RxNorm ingredient level (8). Once each patient's treatment sequence is constructed, the number of unique patients with the same treatment sequence is calculated. The counts by the index year of the first exposure is also stratified for further analysis. A limitation of this code is that the treatment pathway does not distinguish between switching and adding medications (8). The sequences were limited to 20 medications (8). Statistical Methods This is a descriptive summary analysis of data exploration and characterization with no specified assumptions; as such, no statistical analysis was performed. Results Participants We identified 1,192 patients [male: female, 653:539; mean age at diagnosis, 8.3 ± 5.0 years (range: 3.3–13.3 years)] who had > 2 years follow-up (mean, 6.5 ± 3.2 years; range: 2.0–14.2 years) and ASM prescription data after the CDM query application. Patients' available specific diagnosis for epilepsy is shown in Table 1. Table 1. Epilepsy classification and types, common data model (CDM) concept identification (ID), and number (n) of patients with specific epilepsy diagnosis and classification. Overall Treatment Pathway There were 313 distinct treatment pathways in the pediatric epilepsy cohort of our hospital. The most frequently used ASMs in our cohort were valproic acid (26.4%), oxcarbazepine (17.5%), lamotrigine (13.1%), levetiracetam (11.5%), and topiramate (9.2%). During the treatment period, patients were treated with only one (49.0%) or two (27.2%) ASMs (Figure 2). We estimated that 23.8% of our epilepsy patients were drug-resistant by the definition used in our CDM analysis query in Figure 1. Figure 2. Treatment pathways of all 1,192 pediatric epilepsy patients. Specific ASMs used and their sequence is shown in the sunburst plot. The pie chart shows the number of patients with the number of ASMs used during their initial 2 year treatment. Prevalence of Treated Epilepsy and Drug-Resistant Epilepsy (DRE) A detailed diagnosis of the epilepsy type was available in 1,179 patients (Table 1). Patients were grouped as having generalized epilepsy (344 patients) and focal epilepsy (835 patients). Patients' treatment pathway showed a distinctive pattern of ASM selection. The order of the three most frequently used ASMs for focal epilepsy was valproic acid (24.5%), oxcarbazepine (23.8%), and lamotrigine (13.4%), whereas for generalized epilepsy the order was valproic acid (31.8%), lamotrigine (17.1%), and levetiracetam (12.7%) (Figure 3). The percentage of ASM resistance was 26.5% for generalized epilepsy and 22.4% for focal epilepsy. Figure 3. Treatment pathways of generalized epilepsy patients (A) and focal epilepsy patients (B). Subgroup Analysis Subgroup analysis based on different age of onset showed distinctive treatment pathways (Figure 4). Phenobarbital was one of the frequently used ASMs in patients with epilepsy onset < 4 years of age. The frequency of lamotrigine, oxcabazepine, valproic acid, and levetiracetam prescription was similar in patients with epilepsy onset > 13 years of age. Drug resistance differed at 33.1% (onset age, < 4 years), 20.0% (onset age, 4–13 years), and 23.2% (onset, >13 years). In addition, we identified three distinctive pediatric epilepsy syndromes in each subgroup analysis, which showed a remarkably different treatment pathway (Figure 5). Drug resistance was 79.0% for LGS, 7.1% for CAE, and 9.0% for BECTS. Figure 4. Treatment pathways according to different onset age of epilepsy. (A) Onset < 4 years-old, (B) onset age: 4–13 years-old, and (C) Onset > 13 years-old. Figure 5. Treatment pathways of different epilepsy syndromes: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) (A), Childhood Absence Epilepsy (CAE) (B), and Benign Epilepsy with Centro-Temporal Spikes (BECTS) (C). Annual Trend of ASM Prescription The annual prescription volume for certain ASMs is shown in Figure 6. The annual changes of the actual ASM prescription number for patients who underwent monotherapy for a specific year is visualized in a single plot. The number of patients on valproic acid had decreased after issues in adolescent women (14, 15), but in recent years, it has increased again. We also identified a decrease in the use of topiramate since 2013. Use of levetiracetam has increased steadily after its approval in our country since 2007 (16). A slight increase in rufinamide and perampanel prescriptions was also observed after introduction of these drugs in the Republic of Korea. Figure 6. Annual trend of anti-seizure medication (ASM) prescriptions for monotherapy from 2004 to 2017. Discussion Applicability of CDM Analysis for Drug Resistance Evaluation The prevalence of drug-resistant epilepsy ranges from 20 to 40% and varies depending on the definition and population. Up to 20% of pediatric epilepsy patients show drug resistance (17–19), and this increases up to 30 or 40% in the adult population (20–22). The most recent systematic review and meta-analysis reported that the pooled prevalence of drug-resistant epilepsy in newly diagnosed epilepsy patients was 25% (95% confidence interval: 17–32%) (23). We applied the CDM analysis to estimate the proportion of DRE in a cohort of all pediatric epilepsy patients in our institution using the ILAE criteria for DRE (11). The proportion of patients who received >3 ASMs during their first 2 year treatment was 24.4%, which is concordant with previous reports of long-term follow-up studies (17–19). A study that applied the same definition revealed that from 508 pediatric patients, 87 patients (19%) were drug-resistant (24). We calculated the proportion of DRE in our pediatric epilepsy cohort by using a surrogate search condition of the number of ASMs used; the results were concordant with previous reports. Thus, we revealed that CDM analysis is both feasible and applicable in certain fields of epilepsy research. In addition to the number of ASMs used during treatment, detailed prescription information became available with this analysis. Information of overall ASM prescriptions is available with current hospital information data-structure, but it does not provide data based on individual patients. Analysis of ASM prescription data and different treatment pathway data can be helpful for evaluating the real-life treatment and practice. Proportion of DRE in Various Conditions and Subgroup Analysis-Feasibility of CDM Analysis in Epilepsy The proportion of DRE of various subgroups was also available from previous studies. The proportion of DRE in focal epilepsy was similar to that in generalized epilepsy. This may be because many focal epilepsies in childhood show a benign course and good response to ASMs (25). Subgroup analysis of different infant and toddler age groups, school-age children, and adolescents showed different results in DRE and ASM selection in that DRE was more prevalent in infants and toddlers and phenobarbital was one of the commonly used ASMs in this group. This reflects the varying degree of age-specific pediatric epilepsy syndromes and age-specificity in ASM selection. Subgroup analysis of specific epilepsy syndromes such as the LGS, CAE, and BECTS revealed typical drug-resistance profiles. Most patients with LGS, except for one, used three or more ASMs, showing that LGS is drug-resistant in almost all cases. Patients with CAE were well-controlled with one or two ASMs in most cases. The few cases with BECTS represent an atypical progression reported recently (26). Subgroup analysis with the CDM in our cohort was also feasible and provided useful information regarding each subgroup. Treatment Pathway Analysis in Pediatric Epilepsy We provided detailed data regarding ASM usage in our institution for a 14 year-period using the CDM. This provides extensive information such as selection of a certain ASM or different prescription patterns, which draw significant social and medical interest. Prescription of valproate for focal epilepsy is such a finding. Valproic acid is a broad spectrum ASM, most commonly used in adults with generalized onset seizures or generalized epilepsy (27). However, we found that valproate was most frequently prescribed in our cohort instead of oxcarbazepine. This may reflect the fact that valproate is considered as an initial ASM for certain focal epilepsy syndromes in guidelines and expert consensus regarding pediatric epilepsy (28, 29). A limitation in safety profiles and efficacy data in pediatric epilepsy may also underline this finding (30–32). A further regional or national study using the CDM can provide patterns of ASM prescription in South Korea. The interpretation of various different reasons can contribute in better understanding of ASM treatment in epilepsy. Treatment Data for Each Year or Certain Periods In addition to the number of ASMs used during treatment, the annual changes in detailed ASM prescription information became available using CDM analysis. This type of data is not easily available in clinical practice and it is difficult to retrieve prescription data for a specific disease. We could recognize the trends in ASM prescription, which varied according to changes in guidelines, practice parameters, introduction of new ASMs, or our regional state of availability. We revealed that the analysis of annual changes using the CDM can be helpful for identifying the detailed trends in ASM prescriptions. Advantage of CDM Analysis The strength of CDM analysis is that it is suitable for reviewing big data. We had 1,832 pediatric epilepsy patients from 2003 to 2017 and our cohort included 1,192 patients. We would have had to review 2 years follow-up duration of medical records of 1,192 patients to estimate the proportion of DRE and to retrieve the ASM usage if we had used the traditional method of medical record review, which is extremely labor-intensive and prone to human errors. Unlike traditional medical record review research, CDM analysis provides the flexibility of modifying search conditions and adding more data easily. Another strength of CDM research is the application in distributed network research using a large network of health databases (10) Since we have proved the feasibility of this approach, we are now planning to apply this methodology to the adult epilepsy population of our institution and to all other hospitals in our country that also use OMOP-CDM. Our research findings confirmed the applicability and feasibility of CDM analysis and suggest the possibility of a future CDM distributed network research in the field of epilepsy. Limitations and Important Issues in CDM Analysis There are certain limitations to the CDM research, which should be carefully considered. We performed the analysis by forming a hypothesis, constructing a query, and searching for standard concepts to retrieve data, and comparing the data with historical cohorts. Since the de-identified CDM analysis used in this study does not review the medical record of an individual patient, specific situations, such as change of medication due to serious side effects, were not considered. Exact and precise diagnosis is critical when including patients with epilepsy and for further subgroup analysis. This is also important for incidence and risk factor studies that could utilize CDM analysis in a population database (33). Defining search concepts and constructing an adequate query is a critical part in CDM analysis. We performed multiple analyses and reviewed whether a correct cohort was constructed when identifying the cohort of our pediatric epilepsy patients with serial follow-up and ASM treatment. The cohort populations differed significantly as the query structure and contents changed. Definition of drug-resistance (11) is another limitation in this study. It is not clear and widely accepted definition. We could not retrieve data regarding seizure intervals, reasons or mode (substitution or addition) for medication change. Hence, application and validation of drug-resistance need careful interpretation. The limitation of CDM research is also the limitation of this study. These limitations should be carefully considered when designing and interpreting research using CDM. As this study used EHR CDM data, no wash-out period was set. Because a patient's previous prescription history cannot be known in EHR data, the study subject may not be the first epilepsy patient diagnosed. Medical research utilizing big data and well-structured databases can be well-performed with CDM analysis, whereas research requiring a detailed and variable information of a small number of patients can be performed with the traditional medical record review. CDM Tool for Analysis Using the open-sourced OHDSI tool that creates the treatment pathway for type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and depression from CDM data (8), we studied the treatment pathway and sub-phenotyping of ASMs in pediatric patients. The benefits of the standardized structure and the standard terminology of OMOP-CDM enable the reproduction of research with standardized analytics tools and rapid application and expansion of new research topics. It is expected that these tools will assist in analyzing the treatment patterns of drugs in rare as well as chronic diseases. CDM data can also be used to identify patterns of market penetration of medications, such as investigating the country-specific pattern use of antidiabetic medications (9). Since studies on the patterns of ASM medication use have not been reported, CDM data may be extended to investigate differences in medication use across countries with standardized analytics tools. Furthermore, CDM data may be used to examine the effects of different ASM treatment patterns on the treatment outcome in pediatric epilepsy patients. Conclusion This is a unique study on the use of the CDM for evaluating epilepsy outcomes. Our pilot study on a pediatric epilepsy cohort from our entire institute showed that CDM analysis is feasible and applicable in epilepsy research. Based on this data, we can further plan distributed network research. The strengths and limitations of the research using the CDM should be carefully considered when designing the process and interpreting the study results. Data Availability Statement All datasets generated for this study are included in the article/Supplementary Material. Ethics Statement The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Seoul National University Bundang Hospital IRB. Written informed consent for participation was not provided by the participants' legal guardians/next of kin because: IRB confirmed the waiver of consent. Author Contributions HK, SYo, HH, and KK conceived and designed the analysis. SK, SYi, SC, and YJ collected the data and performed the analysis. HK, SYo, SK, HH, and SC wrote the paper. Funding This research was supported by the Seoul National University Bundang Hospital Research Fund (18-2018-014) and the Technology Innovation Program (20004927, Upgrade of CDM based Distributed Biohealth Data Platform and Development of Verification Technology) funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE, Korea). Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: Abbreviations ASM, anti-seizure medication; BECTS, benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes; CAE, childhood absence epilepsy; CDM, common data model; DRE, drug-resistant epilepsy; EHR, electronic health record; LGS, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome; OHDSI, Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics; OMOP-CDM, Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership Common Data Model.

Respiratory dysfunction preceding death is fundamental in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) pathophysiology. Hypoxia occurs with one-third of seizures. In temporal lobe epilepsy, there is volume loss in brainstem regions involved in autonomic control and increasing neuropathological changes with duration of epilepsy suggesting increasingly impaired regulation of ventilation. In animal models, recurrent hypoxic episodes induce long-term facilitation (LTF) of ventilatory function, however, LTF is less robust in older animals. LTF of ventilation may, to some degree, ameliorate the deleterious effects of progressive brainstem atrophy. We investigated the possibility that the duration of epilepsy, or age at epilepsy onset, may impact the severity of seizure-associated respiratory dysfunction. Patients with focal epilepsy undergoing video-EEG telemetry in the epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU) were studied. We found a significant relationship between age at epilepsy onset and duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation for focal seizures not progressing to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures, with longer duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation in patients with epilepsy onset at an older age but no significant relationships between duration of epilepsy or age at EMU admission and ventilatory dysfunction. Our findings suggest an intriguing possibility that LTF of ventilation may be protective when epilepsy starts at a younger age. Introduction Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a common cause of epilepsy related mortality (1–5). Respiratory dysfunction preceding death is implicated as fundamental in SUDEP pathophysiology (6). Ictal apnea, hypoxemia and hypercapnia frequently occur in the ictal and postictal period (7, 8). It has not been established whether the duration of epilepsy or age at epilepsy onset might influence the severity of seizure-related apnea or hypoxia. Imaging studies, in patients who subsequently die of SUDEP, show alterations in brain regions essential for cardiorespiratory recovery and respiratory patterning (9) that may negatively influence the severity of peri-ictal respiratory dysfunction. Physiological studies in animals indicate that recurrent hypoxic episodes result in long-term facilitation (LTF) of respiratory function (10, 11). The degree of LTF with recurrent hypoxia is reduced in older animals (10, 11). In patients with epilepsy and recurrent ictal hypoxic episodes, LTF may provide protection by reducing the severity of respiratory dysfunction with uncontrolled seizures. We investigated ictal-related respiratory dysfunction in patients admitted to the epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU). The aim of this study was to investigate whether the duration of epilepsy, age at epilepsy onset or age on admission to the EMU were associated with the severity of ictal-associated respiratory dysfunction. Materials and Methods Patients with pharmacoresistant focal epilepsy undergoing scalp electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring in the EMU were studied. Details of video-EEG and respiratory function monitoring in the EMU have been described previously (7). Focal seizures without progression to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures as well as focal seizures that progressed to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures (FBTCS) were analyzed. We considered that there may be a floor/ceiling effect on the depth and duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation with FBTCS. Such effects might mask any age-related changes, and therefore, we performed an analysis of focal seizures that did not progress to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures. Patients in this EMU have synchronized recordings of nasal airflow, abdominal excursions, and digital pulse oximetry during video-EEG telemetry monitoring. Patients were selected for analysis if a usable nasal airflow signal, respiration-related abdominal excursion signal, or digital pulse oximetry, was available during recorded seizures. Apnea was defined as cessation of either the nasal airflow or respiratory abdominal excursion signal for 5 s or longer during a recorded seizure. The end of apnea was defined by the onset of regular respirations and cessation of apneic events of 5 s or longer. Oxygen desaturation nadir and duration of oxygen desaturation <90%, as determined by pulse oximetry, were evaluated. In patients where more than one seizure was recorded, the mean apnea duration, mean oxygen desaturation nadir, and the mean desaturation duration was determined for that individual and those values used for subsequent analysis. Age at epilepsy onset, duration of epilepsy, and age at EMU admission were recorded in years. Seizure duration for all seizures and seizures without progression to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures was recorded. The retrospective study was approved by the University of California, Davis Institutional Review Board. Statistical analysis was performed using Sigmaplot. Linear regression analysis was used to determine whether there was a relationship between age at epilepsy onset, duration of epilepsy, or age at EMU admission and the various measures of peri-ictal respiratory dysfunction. Statistical significance was defined as a p < 0.05. For significant associations determined on simple linear regressions analysis, a Pearson Product Moment Correlation was performed. To account for multiple comparisons, a multivariable linear regression analysis was performed for possible predictors of respiratory dysfunction that included associations with significance levels of p ≤ 0.2 on simple linear regression. A Fisher Exact Test was performed to compare the proportion of temporal and extratemporal seizures in childhood (<21 years) vs. adult onset epilepsy. Results Data from 73 patients (37 female) were analyzed. Relevant clinical information is shown in Table 1. Data on patient age, age at epilepsy onset, and epilepsy duration and relevant analyses of peri-ictal respiratory dysfunction are shown in Table 2. Table 1. Clinical characteristics. Table 2. Summary data including all focal and FBTC seizures. There was a significant relationship (p = 0.012) between age at epilepsy onset and duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation for focal seizures that did not progress to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures (BTCS) (Figure 1) with greater duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation in patients with older age at epilepsy onset (Simple regression analysis: Mean O2 desaturation duration (seconds) = 28.91 + (1.632 * Age (years) at epilepsy onset). Pearson correlation coefficient 0.399, p = 0.012. On multiple linear regression analysis for age at epilepsy onset, duration of epilepsy and age at EMU admission, only the age at epilepsy onset was significantly associated with oxygen desaturation duration (p = 0.045). Figure 1. Simple Linear Regression analysis graph demonstrating relationship between the age at epilepsy onset and duration of oxygen desaturation of <90% in focal seizures without secondary generalization (p = 0.012). The abscissa indicates the mean duration of postictal oxygen desaturation below 90% in seconds. The ordinate is the patient age at onset of epilepsy in years. The filled circles are data points for each patient. The solid line through the data points is the regression line. Seizure duration, for all seizures or focal only seizures, was not associated (p > 0.1) with duration of epilepsy, age on EMU admission or age at epilepsy onset. There were no significant relationships (p = > 0.1) between duration of epilepsy or age at EMU admission and the various measures of peri-ictal dysfunction (oxygen desaturation nadir, duration of desaturation below 90% and apnea duration for focal seizures with or without progression to BTCS. Oxygen desaturation nadir was significantly associated with the duration of oxygen desaturation (p < 0.001). Reported seizure frequency at EMU admission was not associated with the duration of postictal oxygen desaturation. There was no significant difference (p = 0.095) in the proportion of temporal vs. extratemporal seizures comparing childhood onset epilepsy (<21 years) vs. patients where seizures started in adulthood (≥21 years). Oxygen desaturation nadir data were available for 71 patients, apnea duration data were available for 30 patients, and data for duration of oxygen desaturation below 90% were available for 57 patients. Discussion We have shown that there is a significant relationship between the age at epilepsy onset and the duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation. An older age at epilepsy onset is related to a more prolonged period of seizure-related oxygen desaturation. Our data suggest that the age of the patient at epilepsy onset is unrelated to the initial severity of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation as indicated by the oxygen desaturation nadir. There is, however, significantly delayed recovery of respiratory function in patients with older age at epilepsy onset. The duration of epilepsy was not related to the severity of respiratory dysfunction. Our findings cannot be accounted for by the possibility that seizure durations are longer when seizures start at an older age. We had previously shown that the duration of individual seizures was directly associated with the degree and duration of peri-ictal oxygen desaturation (7, 8). In the present study we find that seizure duration is not related to the age at epilepsy onset or duration of epilepsy. These findings make it unlikely that the longer duration of postictal respiratory dysfunction, at an older age of epilepsy, onset is a consequence of longer seizure duration. MRI studies in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy demonstrate volume loss in the brainstem regions considered important in autonomic control (12, 13). These alterations are more pronounced in patients dying of SUDEP (12, 13). It has been hypothesized that recurrent seizure-related hypoxic events may cause increasing damage to these brainstem regions (12, 13). Immunohistochemical studies of the ventrolateral medulla demonstrate reductions in neuromodulatory neuropeptides and monoaminergic systems in patients dying of SUDEP relative to control (14), and there was an association of neuropathological alterations with duration of seizures (14). As such, one may expect to find increasing seizure-related respiratory dysfunction with longer duration of uncontrolled epilepsy, however, this was not observed in the present study. Hypoxic episodes with oxygen desaturation to <90% occur in about one-third of focal onset seizures (7). There is convincing evidence for persistent long-term facilitation (LTF) of respiratory activity following recurrent hypoxic episodes (10, 15–19). It is conceivable that LTF of respiratory function with uncontrolled seizures and hypoxic events may, to some degree, counteract the potentially deleterious effects of seizure-related brainstem atrophy and reductions in neuromodulatory neuropeptides considered important in respiratory control. These brainstem LTF changes may account for the fact that no significant peri-ictal respiratory disturbance with duration of epilepsy was detected in our group of patients. In animal models, exposure to intermittent hypoxia results in augmentation of respiratory activity that can persist for, at least, many hours after hypoxic episodes are ended (10). LTF has been demonstrated for phrenic nerve activity in rodents under anesthesia and LTF of ventilation occurs in awake animals (15, 16). LTF can be induced by hypoxic episode durations similar to those that occur in obstructive sleep apnea (17, 18). LTF appears dependent on changes in mitochondrial ultrastructure and increased cytochrome oxidase activity in the pre-Bötzinger nucleus, a structure in the ventrolateral medulla essential for the generation of respiratory rhythms (19). The mitochondrial alterations suggest that the effects of hypoxia are robust and persistent. In the absence of recurrent hypoxic events, however, any post-ictal LTF of respiratory function would be expected to diminish with time following a seizure-related hypoxic event with an unknown decay rate. LTF, if present, may have a greater effect on respiratory function in patients with frequent seizures than in those with rare events. Limitations of this retrospective study include the lack of a reliable estimate of seizure frequency since epilepsy onset and, perhaps more importantly, the frequency of seizure-related hypoxic events prior to EMU admission. These are potentially important factors that could, by cumulative damage to respiratory networks, progressively influence the severity of respiratory dysfunction over extended periods of time. Investigation of these issues in future prospective studies is warranted. Of particular interest to the findings of our study is the observation that, in animal models, old age results in loss of LTF, whereas younger age is associated with greater LTF (11). Recent population-based cohort studies indicate that SUDEP incidence is similar in all age groups including patients <16 years old and those older than 50 years (4). The weighting of factors contributing to BTCS and SUDEP may vary across the age spectrum. More profound respiratory dysfunction in the peri-ictal period contributing to SUDEP may be of greater concern when epilepsy starts at an older age. However, while intriguing, the relevance of our findings with regards to SUDEP pathophysiology remains speculative. Data Availability Statement The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation. Ethics Statement The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by University of California, Davis. Written informed consent for participation was not required for this study in accordance with the national legislation and the institutional requirements. Author Contributions KK jointly conceived the study, contributed to design of study, writing of manuscript, and manuscript revisions. KP contributed to writing of manuscript and manuscript revisions. MS conceived the study, wrote the initial draft, performed data analysis, and contributed to manuscript revisions. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding This work was supported by Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis.

Over 80% of people with epilepsy live in low- to middle-income countries where epilepsy is often undiagnosed and untreated due to limited resources and poor infrastructure. In Africa, the burden of epilepsy is exacerbated by increased risk factors such as central nervous system infections, perinatal insults, and traumatic brain injury. Despite the high incidence of these etiologies, the cause of epilepsy in over 60% of African children is unknown, suggesting a possible genetic origin. Large-scale genetic and genomic research in Europe and North America has revealed new genes and variants underlying disease in a range of epilepsy phenotypes. The relevance of this knowledge to patient care is especially evident among infants with early-onset epilepsies, where early genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis and direct treatment, potentially improving prognosis and quality of life. In Africa, however, genetic epilepsies are among the most under-investigated neurological disorders, and little knowledge currently exists on the genetics of epilepsy among African patients. The increased diversity on the continent may yield unique, important epilepsy-associated genotypes, currently absent from the North American or European diagnostic testing protocols. In this review, we propose that there is strong justification for developing the capacity to offer genetic testing for children with epilepsy in Africa, informed mostly by the existing counseling and interventional needs. Initial simple protocols involving well-recognized epilepsy genes will not only help patients but will give rise to further clinically relevant research, thus increasing knowledge and capacity. Introduction Epilepsy affects approximately 70 million people globally. Of these, over 80% live in low- to middle-income countries (LMICs) (1) where epilepsy is under-diagnosed and often untreated (2). The underlying reasons range from poorly resourced healthcare systems to the social stigma of epilepsy and reluctance to seek treatment. The high prevalence of epilepsy, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) coexists with increased risk factors, especially central nervous system infections, perinatal insults, and traumatic brain injury (3). Epilepsy due to genetic, immune, metabolic, or structural causes is rarely recognized, and its burden is virtually unknown (Figure 1) (3). Figure 1. Proximate causes of active convulsive epilepsy (ACE) in Africa according to currently available knowledge. Charts (A,B) depict the distribution of proximate causes of ACE among all ages (A) and among children in Africa (B) [data obtained from Kariuki et al. (3) and personal communication with coauthors]. Chart (C) reflects the causes of all epilepsies in the first-world environment (5). Charts (A–C) clearly show the significantly higher burden of epilepsy due to central nervous system infections, trauma, and perinatal insult in Africa, particularly among children. Also emphasized is the absence of reliable knowledge on the burden of the genetic, metabolic, and structural causes of epilepsy in Africa. The causal role of genetic variants in epilepsy is increasingly recognized. Over the past two decades, large-scale studies empowered by genomic technologies have shown that many epilepsies previously classified as “idiopathic” have a genetic basis (4, 5) (Figure 1). Effective investigation of genetically and phenotypically complex disorders such as epilepsy requires laboratory protocols incorporating next-generation sequencing (NGS) and chromosomal microarrays; now routinely employed in the diagnostic centers of high income countries (HICs). In Africa, however, resource allocation for genetic services is not prioritized, thus the necessary skills and equipment are lacking. Genetic epilepsy research is practically absent, resulting in few insights into the architecture of the disease in African populations. In this review, we examine the historical and current demographics of epilepsy and the medical diagnostic infrastructure in Africa. Within the context of global genetic research and its impact on personalized medicine, we argue that the time for epilepsy genetics in Africa is now and propose tangible actions to improve access to genomic technologies and diagnostic testing. Disease Burden and Management of Epilepsy in Africa The Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 2010, reported the burden of untreated severe epilepsy second only to HIV infection (6). Epidemiological studies over the past decade show that SSA carries the greatest prevalence and disability burden of epilepsy in the world, with the median prevalence estimated at 14.2 per 1,000 (IQR 8.0–33.2), more than double the prevalence in HICs [5.8 per 1,000 (2.7–12.4)] (3, 7). The true prevalence is likely to be higher, as many cases are not reported and seizures with fewer motor manifestations often go unrecognized (7, 8). Almost 60% of people with epilepsy in SSA do not receive medication and only about 33% of those who do are appropriately managed (7). The likely reflection of this is the substantial risk of premature mortality in people with epilepsy in Africa, reported at rates ranging from 22.2 to 45.1 per 1,000 (9). In addition to causes of death directly attributable to epilepsy, e.g., status epilepticus, many die from seizure-related drowning, head injury or burns (9). Epilepsy also carries with it a significant “social disability” aspect, which is not reflected by the disability weight estimates. Reduced marriage prospects, less access to education, and lower employment opportunities all place an additional burden on the individual and the family (7, 10). The “treatment gap” for epilepsy in Africa, defined as a percentage of people living with active untreated epilepsy is 47% in urban regions, compared with 73% in the rural areas, where prognosis and outcomes are poor (11). Treatment guidelines are usually created in well-resourced environments and require major adaptation to fit the African context (11). The recommended diagnostic tools and newer generation antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are available only in the major tertiary centers of the state sector or in private practice (12). Typically, the correct diagnosis and treatment of early-life epilepsies in African children is achieved months or years after initial presentation and many die undiagnosed. The resulting financial burden placed on the healthcare system in these situations could be alleviated by early genetic diagnoses and timely intervention (13). In South Africa, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) gained statistical prominence in the early 1990s, only to recede under the burden of the HIV/AIDS and TB pandemics (14). In 2015, however, the infant mortality rate dropped below 40/1,000 live births, signaling the need for resource allocation toward better service provision for NCDs (15). Recognition of the immediate and long-term value of genetic services is an imperative part of this transition. Epilepsy as a Genetic Disease The major finding of epilepsy research in recent years is the high prevalence of de novo pathogenic variants, particularly well noted in developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) (16–19). DEEs are characterized by pharmacoresistant seizures, severe electroencephalography (EEG) abnormalities, and developmental delay (DD)/regression/intellectual disability. Approximately 40% of seizures with onset in the first 3 years of life will progress to DEE, and a substantial number of these are associated with variants in known epilepsy genes (20). While the majority of EE patients carry de novo pathogenic changes, recent studies suggest that parental somatic mosaicism is present in up to 10% of the cases (21). This has important implications for genetic counseling and family planning, as the risk of recurrence in these families may be as high as 50% (21). Although clinical and genetic heterogeneity is the hallmark of genetic epilepsy, certain genes and variants co-exist with characteristic clinical features. For instance, pathogenic SCN1A variants are identified in 80% of patients with Dravet syndrome (22). Movement disorders and head stereotypies are often seen with STXBP1 variants (23) and clustered focal seizures with affective symptoms are seen in females with PCDH19 variants (24). Awareness of such features is important in implementing cost-effective testing with a high yield of informative results. Furthermore, disease-causing genes in the severe forms of epilepsy are also implicated in a broader spectrum of epilepsy and associated neurodevelopmental disorders (25). Therefore, testing and therapeutic protocols targeting rare genetic epilepsies may also find application among the more common phenotypes (26). Genetic Testing for Epilepsy The value of genetic testing in epilepsy has been debated and depends on the phenotype and reason for testing. Presently, testing for early-onset epilepsies appears to yield the most informative results, as recently emphasized in a report by Berg and colleagues. In a group of 327 children with seizure onset before the third year of life who underwent some form of genetic testing, pathogenic variants were identified in 132 (40.4%) of the cases (27). While clinical whole-exome sequencing is gaining popularity as a first tier assay for genetically heterogeneous disorders, the targeted approach is mostly still favored in the clinical setting. NGS panels have increased specificity, greater depth of coverage (better sensitivity), less exonic dropout, and fewer issues relating to incidental findings (13, 28). The main disadvantage is missing a pathogenic change in a gene not included in the panel. Chromosomal microarray analysis for genomic copy number variants (CNVs) is indicated in children with seizures accompanying DD/intellectual disability, as there is evidence that up to 10% of these patients have disease-associated CNVs (29). Genomic technologies are expensive to establish and maintain, and require technical and bioinformatic expertise. In South Africa, the established infrastructure for genetic services includes laboratories and clinical services. Regular specialist clinics and outreach initiatives strive to increase awareness and deliver services both locally and to the neighboring, more resource-limited SSA countries, highlighting the need to build capacity across the continent. Despite the challenges of diagnosis and treatment and even in absence of population-specific data, there is sufficient justification to support availability of early screening protocols for specific epilepsy phenotypes. Neuroimaging, ideally magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and EEG remain essential investigations in the diagnosis of structural brain pathology. However, for many generalized epilepsies, MRI and EEG findings lack the specificity and consistency of an informative genetic test result. Most DEEs are genetic in origin, with an increasing number of clinical markers linked to specific genetic etiologies (27). Access to neuroimaging and EEG in some LMICs is very limited, while DNA studies on saliva may become far more accessible at a similar cost. Therefore, resource allocation for genetic testing versus MRI should be prioritized on the basis of the clinical semiology, for early and targeted care (30). The largely de novo etiology of DEE shown in the HICs, should not be vastly different in Africa and while new, “African” epilepsy genes may emerge with future research, the DEE panels currently used in the HICs should also benefit African patients. Genetic testing may sometimes present a more direct and cheaper diagnostic tool than the traditional options, prevent the use of potentially seizure-exacerbating therapies (e.g., carbamazepine for SCN1A-associated DS) and further invasive and expensive investigations. These aspects are equally important to patients and families all over the world, and the benefits carry far-reaching health, psychological and socioeconomic consequences. Epilepsy Research in Africa The existing reports of neurogenetic research in Africa have shown that the genetic underpinnings of certain neurological phenotypes segregate almost exclusively in African populations. Examples include Huntington disease-like type 2 (31, 32), spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) (33, 34) and RYR1-related centronuclear myopathy (35). However, published epilepsy research emanating from the continent focuses on the disease epidemiology, etiology, and management (3, 8, 36–40), and little is known about the genetic causes in African patients. More research is needed to identify the role of presently unknown genetic causes and risk factors for epilepsy in people of African ancestry. Consanguinity and febrile illness feature strongly as risk factors for epilepsy and genetic disease in general. Both occur frequently in African populations, presenting an excellent focus for research which has not been fully explored. Only a few North African studies of ion channel genes in febrile seizure phenotypes (41, 42) and small cohorts of familial epilepsies in consanguineous families have been published (43–45). For cultural reasons, consanguineous unions are more common in North African countries, compared with the rest of the continent (46). Thus the obvious implications for recessive disease are less relevant to populations in SSA where consanguinity is uncommon, emphasizing the need for population-specific translatable research, genetic counseling, and education. Furthermore, research within the context of the increased genetic diversity in Africa may provide additional insights into the underpinnings of familial epilepsies. The large African sibships and increased twinning in some regions (47, 48) offer a valuable opportunity for genetic studies and a better understanding of brain development, potentially opening the way to the discovery of new therapeutic agents. The highly variable response to AEDs is complicated by the African diversity and the challenges of managing comorbidities and medications (e.g., malaria, TB, HIV, and schistosomiasis) (49). Many AEDs are substrates for the Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, which are important determinants of response to most drugs prescribed today. Polymorphisms in the encoding genes are linked to altered levels of activity and adverse drug reactions (50). As an example, individuals carrying the CYP2C9*2 (rs1799853) and CYP2C9*3 [rs1057910(C)] polymorphisms metabolize phenytoin at a markedly slower rate and a higher risk of concentration-dependent neurotoxicity than individuals homozygous for the wild-type allele [CYP2C9*1; rs1057910(A)] (50, 51). However, compared with the European and Asian populations, allele frequencies of these variants among Africans are much lower, negating any real public health applicability in Africa (52, 53). The frequencies of known CYP enzymes show a considerably greater variability across Africa, with a few polymorphisms reported only in African populations. Most research to date focuses on allele frequency distributions of known polymorphisms, and there is a need for discovery of new markers and profiling that is relevant in Africa (54). Adding to this complexity is the widespread use of herbal products, with possible herb–drug interactions which may affect efficacy and toxicity profiles of pharmaceutical drugs (55). Undoubtedly, discovery of new genetic markers of drug response will be of global value, as the ancestral origin of the human population is represented in the African genomes. While genomic research has been powering ahead in the rest of the world for almost two decades, Africa remains far behind. Insights into the genetic diversity in Africa gained through the Human HapMap, and the 1000 Genomes Project was limited to the Yoruba and Esan (Nigeria), Mende (Sierra Leone), and the Luhya and Masai (Kenya) populations, leaving much of the African continent unexplored (56, 57). If this lag continues, the potential health and economic benefits emanating from genomic science may elude an entire continent (58). Initiatives such as the Human Heredity and Health in Africa project (H3Africa) and the African Genome Variation project (AGV) are designed to urgently address this gap in knowledge and capacity (58, 59), with an emphasis on “Afrocentric” genomic research, biorepositories, and bioinformatic networks (58). This should carry the benefits of improved variant databases, as well as development of preventative and targeted treatments in the age of precision medicine. The increasing burden of NCDs in SSA makes a strong case for more financial and intellectual investment into genetic research in Africa and into translating the outcomes into medical practice. Needs and Challenges Many clinicians in Africa are not trained to recognize a possible genetic epilepsy and focus mainly on prescribing treatment. Signs and symptoms are blurred by the layering effects of untreated seizures and multiple insults of birth trauma, co-infections, nutritional insults, and socioeconomic issues. In SSA, acute symptomatic and febrile seizures are frequently assumed to be due to malaria, limiting the search for other causes. Little consideration is given to the increased subsequent risk for epilepsy, much less the possible genetic basis for this risk (60). Often, a genetic etiology is considered only when a second affected child is born. In the setting where families are already struggling to cope with the complex health care of the first affected child, this can become untenable. Efficient management of epilepsy is particularly important in childhood because of the detrimental effects of uncontrolled seizures on the developing brain (1, 61, 62). The prevailing social stigma of epilepsy often labels these children as infectious, mentally ill or spiritually “possessed” (36, 63). It is important to recognize the potential value of community leaders, elders, and traditional healers (THs), in addressing these issues (THs). Many Africans, particularly in the rural setting, are inclined to seek treatment from a TH, rather than a “Western-style” medical doctor. Traditional medicine is seen as more relevant to the African ways of living and, most importantly, it is more accessible. The person-to-neurologist ratio in SSA is up to 5,099,908 persons per neurologist, depending on the region. In contrast, the person-to-TH ratio in the SSA is approximately 1:200 (63). The cost of traditional medicines is not necessarily lower than the more affordable AEDs (e.g., phenobarbital), but a consultation with a TH can be considerably cheaper and is viewed as better value for money (64). A TH spends more time with the patient, counsels the whole family and often accepts non-monetary forms of payment, such as home produce or livestock. It is therefore imperative that the educational programs include THs, who can significantly contribute toward removing the stigma of epilepsy and facilitating treatment. There are also social and cultural beliefs attached to genetics and genetic disease. Many religious African communities instill a sense of acceptance and view genetic testing as interference with “god’s will.” This is not necessarily linked to a level of education, but may stem from a lack of understanding of the choices available (65). Therefore, information and counseling is imperative for patients, families, as well as THs. An additional challenge in SSA with its high morbidity and mortality due to HIV/TB/malaria and migrant labor practices is the phenomenon of “orphan households” (66). The high prevalence of households with single or no biological parents renders genetic testing of family trios impossible, complicating research and diagnostic testing protocols. Biological non-paternity is another issue which must be considered, carrying with it significant ethical implications. To the best of our knowledge, no genetic testing for epilepsy is presently available in SSA. The available genetic testing is generally limited to monogenic diseases and specific, common pathogenic variants. NGS is not routinely performed, though it may sometimes be outsourced through private laboratories, for those who can afford it, as even medical insurance does not always cover the cost. There is also a need for population-based databases and repositories of genomic variants, for correct variant interpretation in the African context. Therefore, the question that begs asking is whether there is justification in the setting of such obstacles and limited resources, for apparently elite medicine. In our opinion, the answer is “yes” but implementation requires a political and financial engagement from health authorities. Outsourcing of testing to service providers in the HICs presents an economical solution initially, but does not serve to build skills and capacity in Africa. In a middle-income country like South Africa, creating local capacity can be achieved relatively easily with creative use of available infrastructure and an investment in training and human resources. NGS costs are dropping, and manufacturers are focusing on solutions for better scalability and cost-effective analysis of smaller sample batches within clinically relevant turn-around-times. Service-level agreements with local technical service providers (e.g., sequencing facilities affiliated to universities or commercial companies) are being explored. Conclusion and Future Directions Reducing the epilepsy treatment gap in Africa requires improved access to multidisciplinary care (67). The clinical utility of genetic testing in epilepsy presents a compelling case and an opportunity to bring NGS technology into diagnostic laboratories in Africa. It is time to for practical solutions with tangible outputs: Training for healthcare professionals in primary healthcare, to create awareness of genetic epilepsies and key clinical identifiers of patients most likely to benefit from testing. Education initiatives addressing the misconceptions and prejudices toward epilepsy, genetic disease, and testing aimed at patients, families, community leaders and THs. Here, genetic counselors have an important role to play. SA is the only African country offering Masters-level training for genetic counselors who struggle to find employment post qualification. There is a need for job creation and increased capacity. Establishing referral systems between the THs and medical clinics, facilitating access to AEDs, psychosocial support, and genetic counseling. It is crucial that the knowledge gained and resources created through projects such as H3Africa and the AGV are accessible to the diagnostic laboratories. Initially, small physician–researcher collaborations are likely to drive epilepsy genetic research in Africa. Genetic testing of over 200 patients with DEE is currently underway at the University of Cape Town, in collaboration with the Northwestern University in Chicago. It is hoped that the project will create a basis for a variant database, give rise to a genetic service for epilepsy, and act as a springboard for more epilepsy research in SA and more broadly on the African continent. Ethics Statements This article forms a part of the justification for the genetic epilepsy research referred to in the text, currently underway at University of Cape Town, in collaboration with Northwestern University in Chicago. The research study was granted ethical approval by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Cape Town, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (HREC REF 232/2015).