Stars are the most widely recognized astronomical objects, and represent the most fundamental building blocks of galaxies. The age, distribution, and composition of the stars in a galaxy trace the history, dynamics, and evolution of that galaxy. Moreover, stars are responsible for the manufacture and distribution of heavy elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, and their characteristics are intimately tied to the characteristics of the planetary systems that may coalesce about them. Consequently, the study of the birth, life, and death of stars is central to the field of astronomy. Star Formation Stars are born within the clouds of dust and scattered throughout most galaxies. A familiar example of such as a dust cloud is the Orion Nebula. Turbulence deep within these clouds gives rise to knots with sufficient mass that the gas and dust can begin to collapse under its own gravitational attraction. As the cloud collapses, the material at the center begins to heat up. Known as a protostar, it is this hot core at the heart of the collapsing cloud that will one day become a star. Three-dimensional computer models of star formation predict that the spinning clouds of collapsing gas and dust may break up into two or three blobs; this would explain why the majority the stars in the Milky Way are paired or in groups of multiple stars. Powerful Stellar Eruption Powerful Stellar Eruption The observations of Eta Carinae's light echo are providing new insight into the behavior of powerful massive stars on the brink of detonation. Credit: NOAO, AURA, NSF, and N. Smith (University of Arizona) As the cloud collapses, a dense, hot core forms and begins gathering dust and gas. Not all of this material ends up as part of a star — the remaining dust can become planets, asteroids, or comets or may remain as dust. In some cases, the cloud may not collapse at a steady pace. In January 2004, an amateur astronomer, James McNeil, discovered a small nebula that appeared unexpectedly near the nebula Messier 78, in the constellation of Orion. When observers around the world pointed their instruments at McNeil's Nebula, they found something interesting — its brightness appears to vary. Observations with NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory provided a likely explanation: the interaction between the young star's magnetic field and the surrounding gas causes episodic increases in brightness. Main Sequence Stars A star the size of our Sun requires about 50 million years to mature from the beginning of the collapse to adulthood. Our Sun will stay in this mature phase (on the main sequence as shown in the Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram) for approximately 10 billion years. Stars are fueled by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen to form helium deep in their interiors. The outflow of energy from the central regions of the star provides the pressure necessary to keep the star from collapsing under its own weight, and the energy by which it shines. As shown in the Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram, Main Sequence stars span a wide range of luminosities and colors, and can be classified according to those characteristics. The smallest stars, known as red dwarfs, may contain as little as 10% the mass of the Sun and emit only 0.01% as much energy, glowing feebly at temperatures between 3000-4000K. Despite their diminutive nature, red dwarfs are by far the most numerous stars in the Universe and have lifespans of tens of billions of years. On the other hand, the most massive stars, known as hypergiants, may be 100 or more times more massive than the Sun, and have surface temperatures of more than 30,000 K. Hypergiants emit hundreds of thousands of times more energy than the Sun, but have lifetimes of only a few million years. Although extreme stars such as these are believed to have been common in the early Universe, today they are extremely rare - the entire Milky Way galaxy contains only a handful of hypergiants. Stars and Their Fates In general, the larger a star, the shorter its life, although all but the most massive stars live for billions of years. When a star has fused all the hydrogen in its core, nuclear reactions cease. Deprived of the energy production needed to support it, the core begins to collapse into itself and becomes much hotter. Hydrogen is still available outside the core, so hydrogen fusion continues in a shell surrounding the core. The increasingly hot core also pushes the outer layers of the star outward, causing them to expand and cool, transforming the star into a red giant. If the star is sufficiently massive, the collapsing core may become hot enough to support more exotic nuclear reactions that consume helium and produce a variety of heavier elements up to iron. However, such reactions offer only a temporary reprieve. Gradually, the star's internal nuclear fires become increasingly unstable - sometimes burning furiously, other times dying down. These variations cause the star to pulsate and throw off its outer layers, enshrouding itself in a cocoon of gas and dust. What happens next depends on the size of the core. Universe Stars Helix Nebula Average Stars Become White Dwarfs For average stars like the Sun, the process of ejecting its outer layers continues until the stellar core is exposed. This dead, but still ferociously hot stellar cinder is called a White Dwarf. White dwarfs, which are roughly the size of our Earth despite containing the mass of a star, once puzzled astronomers - why didn't they collapse further? What force supported the mass of the core? Quantum mechanics provided the explanation. Pressure from fast moving electrons keeps these stars from collapsing. The more massive the core, the denser the white dwarf that is formed. Thus, the smaller a white dwarf is in diameter, the larger it is in mass! These paradoxical stars are very common - our own Sun will be a white dwarf billions of years from now. White dwarfs are intrinsically very faint because they are so small and, lacking a source of energy production, they fade into oblivion as they gradually cool down. This fate awaits only those stars with a mass up to about 1.4 times the mass of our Sun. Above that mass, electron pressure cannot support the core against further collapse. Such stars suffer a different fate as described below. Hubble view of an expanding halo of light around star V838 Monocerotis White Dwarfs May Become Novae If a white dwarf forms in a binary or multiple star system, it may experience a more eventful demise as a nova. Nova is Latin for "new" - novae were once thought to be new stars. Today, we understand that they are in fact, very old stars - white dwarfs. If a white dwarf is close enough to a companion star, its gravity may drag matter - mostly hydrogen - from the outer layers of that star onto itself, building up its surface layer. When enough hydrogen has accumulated on the surface, a burst of nuclear fusion occurs, causing the white dwarf to brighten substantially and expel the remaining material. Within a few days, the glow subsides and the cycle starts again. Sometimes, particularly massive white dwarfs (those near the 1.4 solar mass limit mentioned above) may accrete so much mass in the manner that they collapse and explode completely, becoming what is known as a supernova. Hubble Space Telescope image of supernova remnant N 63A Supernovae Leave Behind Neutron Stars or Black Holes Main sequence stars over eight solar masses are destined to die in a titanic explosion called a supernova. A supernova is not merely a bigger nova. In a nova, only the star's surface explodes. In a supernova, the star's core collapses and then explodes. In massive stars, a complex series of nuclear reactions leads to the production of iron in the core. Having achieved iron, the star has wrung all the energy it can out of nuclear fusion - fusion reactions that form elements heavier than iron actually consume energy rather than produce it. The star no longer has any way to support its own mass, and the iron core collapses. In just a matter of seconds the core shrinks from roughly 5000 miles across to just a dozen, and the temperature spikes 100 billion degrees or more. The outer layers of the star initially begin to collapse along with the core, but rebound with the enormous release of energy and are thrown violently outward. Supernovae release an almost unimaginable amount of energy. For a period of days to weeks, a supernova may outshine an entire galaxy. Likewise, all the naturally occurring elements and a rich array of subatomic particles are produced in these explosions. On average, a supernova explosion occurs about once every hundred years in the typical galaxy. About 25 to 50 supernovae are discovered each year in other galaxies, but most are too far away to be seen without a telescope. Still of swirling flow of gas from Rossi X-Ray Timing Explorer Neutron Stars If the collapsing stellar core at the center of a supernova contains between about 1.4 and 3 solar masses, the collapse continues until electrons and protons combine to form neutrons, producing a neutron star. Neutron stars are incredibly dense - similar to the density of an atomic nucleus. Because it contains so much mass packed into such a small volume, the gravitation at the surface of a neutron star is immense. Like the White Dwarf stars above, if a neutron star forms in a multiple star system it can accrete gas by stripping it off any nearby companions. The Rossi X-Ray Timing Explorer has captured telltale X-Ray emissions of gas swirling just a few miles from the surface of a neutron star. Neutron stars also have powerful magnetic fields which can accelerate atomic particles around its magnetic poles producing powerful beams of radiation. Those beams sweep around like massive searchlight beams as the star rotates. If such a beam is oriented so that it periodically points toward the Earth, we observe it as regular pulses of radiation that occur whenever the magnetic pole sweeps past the line of sight. In this case, the neutron star is known as a pulsar. Chandra image of the supermassive black hole at our Galaxy's center, a.k.a. Sagittarius A Black Holes If the collapsed stellar core is larger than three solar masses, it collapses completely to form a black hole: an infinitely dense object whose gravity is so strong that nothing can escape its immediate proximity, not even light. Since photons are what our instruments are designed to see, black holes can only be detected indirectly. Indirect observations are possible because the gravitational field of a black hole is so powerful that any nearby material - often the outer layers of a companion star - is caught up and dragged in. As matter spirals into a black hole, it forms a disk that is heated to enormous temperatures, emitting copious quantities of X-rays and Gamma-rays that indicate the presence of the underlying hidden companion. False color picture of supernova remnant Cassiopeia A From the Remains, New Stars Arise The dust and debris left behind by novae and supernovae eventually blend with the surrounding interstellar gas and dust, enriching it with the heavy elements and chemical compounds produced during stellar death. Eventually, those materials are recycled, providing the building blocks for a new generation of stars and accompanying planetary systems.

Stars are huge celestial bodies made mostly of hydrogen and helium that produce light and heat from the churning nuclear forges inside their cores. Aside from our sun, the dots of light we see in the sky are all light-years from Earth. They are the building blocks of galaxies, of which there are billions in the universe. It’s impossible to know how many stars exist, but astronomers estimate that in our Milky Way galaxy alone, there are about 300 billion. A star is born The life cycle of a star spans billions of years. As a general rule, the more massive the star, the shorter its life span. Birth takes place inside hydrogen-based dust clouds called nebulae. Over the course of thousands of years, gravity causes pockets of dense matter inside the nebula to collapse under their own weight. One of these contracting masses of gas, known as a protostar, represents a star’s nascent phase. Because the dust in the nebulae obscures them, protostars can be difficult for astronomers to detect. As a protostar gets smaller, it spins faster because of the conservation of angular momentum—the same principle that causes a spinning ice skater to accelerate when she pulls in her arms. Increasing pressure creates rising temperatures, and during this time, a star enters what is known as the relatively brief T Tauri phase. Millions of years later, when the core temperature climbs to about 27 million degrees Fahrenheit (15 million degrees Celsius), nuclear fusion begins, igniting the core and setting off the next—and longest—stage of a star’s life, known as its main sequence. Most of the stars in our galaxy, including the sun, are categorized as main sequence stars. They exist in a stable state of nuclear fusion, converting hydrogen to helium and radiating x-rays. This process emits an enormous amount of energy, keeping the star hot and shining brightly. All that glitters Some stars shine more brightly than others. Their brightness is a factor of how much energy they put out–known as luminosity–and how far away from Earth they are. Color can also vary from star to star because their temperatures are not all the same. Hot stars appear white or blue, whereas cooler stars appear to have orange or red hues. By plotting these and other variables on a graph called the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, astronomers can classify stars into groups. Along with main sequence and white dwarf stars, other groups include dwarfs, giants, and supergiants. Supergiants may have radii a thousand times larger than that of our own sun. Stars spend 90 percent of their lives in their main sequence phase. Now around 4.6 billion years old, Earth’s sun is considered an average-size yellow dwarf star, and astronomers predict it will remain in its main sequence stage for several billion more years. As stars move toward the ends of their lives, much of their hydrogen has been converted to helium. Helium sinks to the star's core and raises the star's temperature—causing its outer shell of hot gases to expand. These large, swelling stars are known as red giants. But there are different ways a star’s life can end, and its fate depends on how massive the star is. The red giant phase is actually a prelude to a star shedding its outer layers and becoming a small, dense body called a white dwarf. White dwarfs cool for billions of years. Some, if they exist as part of a binary star system, may gather excess matter from their companion stars until their surfaces explode, triggering a bright nova. Eventually all white dwarfs go dark and cease producing energy. At this point, which scientists have yet to observe, they become known as black dwarfs. Big bang Massive stars eschew this evolutionary path and instead go out with a bang—detonating as supernovae. While they may appear to be swelling red giants on the outside, their cores are actually contracting, eventually becoming so dense that they collapse, causing the star to explode. These catastrophic bursts leave behind a small core that may become a neutron star or even, if the remnant is massive enough, a black hole. Because certain supernovae have a predictable pattern of destruction and resulting luminosity, astronomers are able to use them as “standard candles,” or astronomical measuring tools, to help them measure distances in the universe and calculate its rate of expansion. See stunning photos of nebulae The familiar eyeball shape of the Helix Nebula shows only two dimensions of this complex celestial body. But new observations suggest it may actually be composed of two gaseous disks nearly perpendicular to each other. This false-color infrared image captured by the Spitzer Space Telescope shows the Henize 206 Nebula, a massive cloud of gas and dust in which hundreds and possibly thousands of new stars have formed over the last ten million years. The nebula, located just outside the Milky Way in a galaxy called the Large Magellanic Cloud, offers astrophysicists a celestial ringside seat on the death and rebirth of stars. The Eskimo Nebula got its name because the astronomer who discovered it in 1787 thought it looked like a person's head surrounded by a parka hood. This highly detailed image taken in 2000 by the Hubble Space Telescope, however, reveals a much more complex structure, one which astrophysicists are still trying to explain. An infrared image of the Rosette Nebula shows super-hot O stars (blue dots inside spheres) amid a torrent of gas and dust (green and red). This star-forming nebula, which lies 5,000 light-years away in the constellation Monoceros, is named for its rosebud-like shape when seen using only optical light. This true-color mosaic captured by the Hubble Space Telescope shows a small portion of the Orion Nebula. The image provides unprecedented detail of the nebula, revealing elongated objects oriented on the region's brightest stars, rapidly expanding plumes of material around young stars, and protoplanetary disks. This dark column of cool molecular hydrogen gas and dust is part of the Eagle Nebula, a star-forming region 6,500 light-years away in the constellation Serpens. In this image, taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, new stars can been seen inside fingerlike protrusions extending from the top of the nebula. Each "fingertip" is slightly larger than our entire solar system. The Cat's Eye Nebula contains some of the most complex gas formations astronomers have ever seen, including concentric shells, high-speed jets, and unusual shock-induced knots. Some scientists think the nebula's intricate structures suggest it is a double-star system. The familiar eyeball shape of the Helix Nebula shows only two dimensions of this complex celestial body. But new observations suggest it may actually be composed of two gaseous disks nearly perpendicular to each other. HELIX NEBULA The familiar eyeball shape of the Helix Nebula shows only two dimensions of this complex celestial body. But new observations suggest it may actually be composed of two gaseous disks nearly perpendicular to each other. Looking up Depending on cloud cover and where you’re standing, you may see countless stars blanketing the sky above you, or none at all. In cities and other densely populated areas, light pollution makes it nearly impossible to stargaze. By contrast, some parts of the world are so dark that looking up reveals the night sky in all its rich celestial glory. WHERE ARE THE STARS? SEE HOW LIGHT POLLUTION AFFECTS NIGHT SKIES Of the many ways Earth is polluted, light pollution may be the least talked about. This short film, shot mainly in California by Sriram Murali, goes through all the levels of the scale, showing how the view of the cosmos gets better in less light-polluted areas. Ancient cultures looked to the sky for all sorts of reasons. By identifying different configurations of stars—known as constellations—and tracking their movements, they could follow the seasons for farming as well as chart courses across the seas. There are dozens of constellations. Many are named for mythical figures, such as Cassiopeia and Orion the Hunter. Others are named for the animals they resemble, such as Ursa Minor (Little Bear) and Canus Major (Big Dog). Today astronomers use constellations as guideposts for naming newly discovered stars. Constellations also continue to serve as navigational tools. In the Southern Hemisphere, for example, the famous Southern Cross constellation is used as a point of orientation. Meanwhile people in the north may rely on Polaris, or the North Star, for direction. Polaris is part of the well-known constellation Ursa Minor, which includes the famous star pattern known as the Little Dipper.

Look up at the sky on a clear night, and you’ll see thousands of stars – about 6,000 or so. But that’s only a tiny fraction of all the stars out there. The rest are too far away for us to see them. We only trust experts. We only publish experts. Support us A photograph of the Sun. The Sun is a star, the closest one to us – 93 million miles away. Roman Studio/Moment via Getty Images The universe, galaxies, stars Yet astronomers like me have figured out how to estimate the total number of stars in the universe, which is everything that exists. Scattered throughout the universe are galaxies – clusters of stars, planets, gas and dust bunched together. Like people, galaxies are diverse. They come in different sizes and shapes. Earth is in the Milky Way, a spiral galaxy; its stars cluster in spiral arms that swirl around the galaxy’s center. Other galaxies are elliptical – kind of egg-shaped – and some are irregular, with a variety of shapes. An artist's concept of the swirling spiral arms of our Milky Way galaxy. Artist’s concept of a face-on look at the Milky Way. Note the spiral arms. A nighttime photograph taken at Utah's Canyonlands National Park, looking skyward and revealing thousands of stars in the Milky Way. From Canyonlands National Park in Utah, a view of a small part of the Milky Way. National Park Service/Emily Ogden Counting the galaxies Before calculating the number of stars in the universe, astronomers first have to estimate the number of galaxies. To do that, they take very detailed pictures of small parts of the sky and count all the galaxies they see in those pictures. That number is then multiplied by the number of pictures needed to photograph the whole sky. The answer: There are approximately galaxies in the universe – that’s 2 trillion. 15,000 galaxies appear as small dots and blots in this NASA photograph of the nighttime sky. 15,000 galaxies appear as small dots and blots in this NASA photograph of the nighttime sky. Each galaxy contains billions of stars. Counting the stars Astronomers don’t know exactly how many stars are in each of those 2 trillion galaxies. Most are so distant, there’s no way to tell precisely. But we can make a good guess at the number of stars in our own Milky Way. Those stars are diverse, too, and come in a wide variety of sizes and colors. Our Sun, a white star, is medium-size, medium-weight and medium-hot: 27 million degrees Fahrenheit at its center (15 million degrees Celsius). Bigger, heavier and hotter stars tend to be blue, like Vega in the constellation Lyra. Smaller, lighter and dimmer stars are usually red, like Proxima Centauri. Except for the Sun, it’s the closest star to us. A red dwarf star. Artist’s concept of a red dwarf star with an exoplanet in orbit. About two-thirds of the stars in the Milky Way are red dwarfs. Exoplanet is the name for worlds outside our solar system. An incredible number Red, white and blue stars give off different amounts of light. By measuring that starlight – specifically, its color and brightness – astronomers can estimate how many stars our galaxy holds. With that method, they discovered the Milky Way has about 100 billion stars. Now the next step. Using the Milky Way as our model, we can multiply the number of stars in a typical galaxy (100 billion) by the number of galaxies in the universe (2 trillion). The answer is an absolutely astounding number. There are approximately 200 billion trillion stars in the universe. Or, to put it another way, 200 sextillion. That’s The number is so big, it’s hard to imagine. But try this: It’s about 10 times the number of cups of water in all the oceans of Earth. Think about that the next time you’re looking at the night sky – and then wonder about what might be happening on the trillions of worlds orbiting all those stars.

Astronomers spying on a stellar system located dozens of lightyears from Earth have, for the first time, observed a troubling fireworks show: A star, named EK Draconis, ejected a massive burst of energy and charged particles much more powerful than anything scientists have seen in our own solar system. The researchers, including astrophysicist Yuta Notsu of the University of Colorado Boulder, will publish their results Dec. 9 in the journal Nature Astronomy. The study explores a stellar phenomenon called a "coronal mass ejection," sometimes known as a solar storm. Notsu explained that the sun shoots out these sorts of eruptions on a regular basis -- they're made up of clouds of extremely-hot particles, or plasma, that can hurtle through space at speeds of millions of miles per hour. And they're potentially bad news: If a coronal mass ejection hit Earth dead on, it could fry satellites in orbit and shut down the power grids serving entire cities. "Coronal mass ejections can have a serious impact on Earth and human society," said Notsu, a research associate at the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) at CU Boulder and the U.S. National Solar Observatory. The new study, led by Kosuke Namekata of the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan and formerly a visiting scholar at CU Boulder, also suggests that they can get a lot worse. In that research, Namekata, Nostu and their colleagues used telescopes on the ground and in space to peer at EK Draconis, which looks like a young version of the sun. In April 2020, the team observed EK Draconis ejecting a cloud of scorching-hot plasma with a mass in the quadrillions of kilograms -- more than 10 times bigger than the most powerful coronal mass ejection ever recorded from a sun-like star. The event may serve as a warning of just how dangerous the weather in space can be. "This kind of big mass ejection could, theoretically, also occur on our sun," Notsu said. "This observation may help us to better understand how similar events may have affected Earth and even Mars over billions of years." Superflares erupt Notsu explained that coronal mass ejections often come right after a star lets loose a flare, or a sudden and bright burst of radiation that can extend far out into space. Recent research, however, has suggested that on the sun, this sequence of events may be relatively sedate, at least so far as scientists have observed. In 2019, for example, Notsu and his colleagues published a study that showed that young sun-like stars around the galaxy seem to experience frequent superflares -- like our own solar flares but tens or even hundreds of times more powerful. Such a superflare could, theoretically, also happen on Earth's sun but not very often, maybe once every several thousand years. Still, it got Notsu's team curious: Could a superflare also lead to an equally super coronal mass ejection? "Superflares are much bigger than the flares that we see from the sun," Notsu said. "So we suspect that they would also produce much bigger mass ejections. But until recently, that was just conjecture." Danger from above To find out, the researchers set their sights on EK Draconis. The curious star, Notsu explained, is about the same size as our sun, but, at just 100 million years old, it's a relative youngster in a cosmic sense. "It's what our sun looked like 4.5 billion years ago," Notsu said. The researchers observed the star for 32 nights in winter and spring 2020 using NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) and Kyoto University's SEIMEI Telescope. On April 5, Notsu and his colleagues got lucky: The researchers looked on as EK Draconis erupted into a superflare, a really big one. About 30 minutes later, the team observed what appeared to be a coronal mass ejection flying away from the star's surface. The researchers were only able to catch the first step in that ejection's life, called the "filament eruption" phase. But even so, it was a monster, moving at a top speed of roughly 1 million miles per hour. It may also not bode well for life on Earth: The team's findings hint that the sun could also be capable of such violent extremes. But don't hold your breath -- like superflares, super coronal mass ejections are probably rare around our getting-on-in-years sun. Still, Notsu noted that huge mass ejections may have been much more common in the early years of the solar system. Gigantic coronal mass ejections, in other words, could have helped to shape planets like Earth and Mars into what they look like today. "The atmosphere of present-day Mars is very thin compared to Earth's," Notsu said. "In the past, we think that Mars had a much thicker atmosphere. Coronal mass ejections may help us to understand what happened to the planet over billions of years." Co-authors on the new study include researchers from the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, University of Hyogo, Kyoto University, Kobe University, Tokyo Institute of Technology, The University of Tokyo and Doshisha University.

Stars, like our own Sun, have not always been around. Stars are born and die over millions or even billions of years. Stars form when regions of dust and gas in the galaxy collapse due to gravity. Without this dust and gas, stars would not form. THE DUSTY NUSERIES OF STARS A galaxy contains not only billions of stars, but also large amounts of gas and dust. These regions of gas and dust in the galaxy lie in the space between the stars. If the galaxy were a street, the houses would be stars and the regions of gas and dust would be the gardens in between the houses. The space between the stars in a galaxy is called the interstellar mediumThe entire space inside galaxies where there are no stars, but instead a lot of gas and dust., because it is the medium, or substance, that makes up the space between stellar objects. The regions of gas and dust are called molecular cloudsA large space cloud filled with gas and dust. Molecular clouds are found inside the interstellar medium., because of their content. Molecular clouds are made of a mix of atoms, molecules, and dust. Atoms are the small building blocks of all the stuff around us. Molecules consist of two or more atoms joined together. The molecules present in molecular clouds are typically molecular hydrogen, H2 , but can also be more complex molecules, such as methanol, which consists of six atoms, or water, which consists of three atoms. Dust grains are even larger clumps of matter and they can be up to a few millimeters in size, which is huge compared with atoms or molecules. Molecular clouds in the interstellar medium are large. In fact, a single molecular cloud can be hundreds of thousands of times heavier than the Sun. Their volumes also vary: a molecular cloud can be the same size as, or many times bigger than, our entire solar system. These enormous molecular clouds undergo turbulent motion. This means that the gas and dust within the clouds do not stay in the same place as time passes. These substances move around in all directions, like children running around in a school yard. This turbulent motion of the gas and dust distributes the atoms and molecules unevenly, so that some regions of the molecular cloud will have more matter in them than other regions Figure 1A. If the gas and dust pile up to a very high level in a certain region, that region starts to collapse due to the pull from its own gravity. The region is smaller than the molecular cloud and lives inside the molecular cloud. The region is “only” a few hundred Astronomical Units (AU1 Astronomical Unit, which is the distance from the Earth to the Sun.s), which is a few hundred times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Figure 1 - The process of star formation. Figure 1 - The process of star formation. The illustration shows the six steps of star formation for Sun-like stars. The process starts on (A), where gas and dust in the space between stars (also called the interstellar medium, ISM) collapse into a dense ball of gas called a prestellar core (B) that eventually will become the sun. During the collapse a disk (C) forms around the core, while two jets are emitted at the poles. At some point the star stops growing, but gas still fall onto the disk (D). After a few million years this process also halts. The star is now born (E), while the planets are being formed from the left-over material, which will eventually become a solar system (F). A solar system typically lives 10 billion years after the formation process. THE COLLAPSING MOLECULAR CLOUD A molecular cloud is very cold, only a few degrees above absolute zeroThe lowest possible temperature, which is also called 0°K., which is the lowest temperature possible (also called 0°K). But, when gas and dust start to collapse in a region within the molecular cloud, it slowly heats up. This is a consequence of a law of physics, which tells us that, when matter is squeezed together, the density of the matter will increase and the matter will start to heat up. The outer edge of a collapsing region will have a temperature of around 10° above absolute zero (also called 10°K), and the inner region will slowly heat up to around 300°K, which is around room temperature. When the collapsing region has reached a size of nearly 10,000 AU, it is called a pre-stellar core (Figure 1B) and is officially a star in-the-making. “Stellar” means star, so pre-stellar means, “before becoming a star.” The word core refers to the gas and dust, which are now so dense that the term core is more precise than region or cloud. Also, this pre-stellar core will later become the interior core of the star. Over the next 50,000 years or so, the pre-stellar core contracts. This might sound like a long time, but on an astronomical timescale it is considered a fairly swift process compared, for instance, to the age of the Universe, which is almost 14 billion years. The core contracts until it is around 1,000 AU (Figure 1C). It is still composed of the same gas and dust, so this means the density of that matter is increasing as the diameter shrinks to 1/10th of the original size of the collapsing region. After 50,000 years has passed, the system will have formed a disk around the central core, and excess material will be ejected outward from the poles of the star. A pole on a star is like those on the Earth, namely defined as the axis that the star spins around. In Figure 1C, you can see two fountain-like structures where this excess material is ejected. These structures are called jets, and they obey the laws of physics. The random motion of the gas and dust that we described earlier, combined with the system's contraction as the pre-stellar core forms, will cause the whole system to rotate. This process causes a flat disk to form around the pre-stellar core. This is similar to the way a dress forms a flat disk around a spinning ice-skater. If the skater was not rotating, the dress would not be a flat disk around her, but instead would hang along her sides. The jets at the poles arise to keep the system in balance. The system is now called a proto-star, which means it is at its very first stage of becoming a real star. FROM PRE-STELLAR CORE TO STAR The disk is crucial for the proto-star to grow into a properly sized star. The disk is mainly composed of gas, which rotates with the disk and slowly approaches the surface of the proto-star. When the gas comes close enough to the star, it falls onto the surface of the star because of gravity, and the star grows. This process of growing is called an accretionThe process where one object accumulates the mass from another object. process and the star is said to accrete (accumulate) matter from the disk. Over the next 1,000 years, the matter from the disk is either accreted by the star or expelled from the disk (Figure 1D). The star has grown enough in size and density for the central region to initiate a nuclear reaction, which causes the star to shine, like the Sun. At this point, the star is called a T-tauri star, and this is the first time that the star can be observed visually. The star eventually stops accreting matter from the disk, but the remaining material around the star is still in a disk-like shape (Figure 1E). The disk no longer serves the purpose of feeding the star with matter to make the star grow. Instead, the disk is now just a circular moving plane of material, which will slowly start to clump together and orbit the star. These small clumps, made from the left-over material from the star's creation, will form new planets. This means that the planets in our solar system are made of the leftover material from the Sun's birth! This is also why all the planets in the solar system are found in the same plane! The final solar system (Figure 1F) is finished when the disk is completely exhausted, and all the planets are formed. Over the next 10 billion years, the star will burn nuclear fuel in its center and emit energy as the radiation we call sunlight. OBSERVING MOLECULAR CLOUDS Molecular clouds that host and shape newborn stars are dark areas in the night sky. It is not possible for a human to see a molecular cloud—not even with a telescope. The reason that we cannot see a molecular cloud is that dust particles are scattered all over the cloud, and they absorb the light from surrounding stars. This prevents starlight from traveling through space and reaching us here on Earth, which is why a molecular cloud looks like a dark area in the sky. Fortunately for astronomers, the molecular cloud is transparent to radio waves. This means that radio waves are not absorbed by the dust particles in the cloud and the radio waves can therefore travel freely down to us on earth. Radio waves are not visible to the eye, but, using big radio telescopes, it is possible to get signals from these otherwise dark molecular clouds. These radio waves carry information about the contents of the dark molecular cloud. If a star is being born, the cloud will send out different radio waves than if no star is being born within it. The use of radio waves allows astronomers to see when stars are being born, even though the molecular cloud is dark. And, even though astronomers today know a lot about how stars like the Sun are formed, there is actually still a great mystery to be solved. CONCLUSION The great mystery arises when very large stars form. Astronomers know that stars up to about six times the mass of our Sun are born the way we have described in this article. Stars with greater masses require a different process, because the pressure from the stars' radiation will push the disk away, preventing stars from growing larger than roughly six times the size of our Sun. Astronomers have seen these large stars, so they know large stars exist and must be born in some way. But, how they are born is still a big question for astronomers all over the world.